#### General
public[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Conspiracy\_theory&action=edit&section=15
"Edit section: General public")]

People who feel [empowered](/wiki/Empowerment "Empowerment") are more
resistant to conspiracy theories. Methods to promote empowerment include
encouraging people to use [analytical thinking](/wiki/Analytical\_thinking
"Analytical thinking"), [priming](/wiki/Priming\_\(psychology\) "Priming
\(psychology\)") people to think of situations where they are in control, and
ensuring that decisions by society and government are seen to follow
procedural fairness (the use of fair decision-making procedures).[50]

Methods of refutation which have shown effectiveness in various circumstances
include: providing facts that demonstrate the conspiracy theory is false,
attempting to discredit the source, explaining how the logic is invalid or
misleading, and providing links to fact-checking websites.[50] It can also be
effective to use these strategies in advance, informing people that they could
encounter misleading information in the future, and why the information should
be rejected (also called inoculation or prebunking).[50][96][97] While it has
been suggested that discussing conspiracy theories can raise their profile and
make them seem more legitimate to the public, the discussion can put people on
guard instead as long as it is sufficiently persuasive.[9]

Other approaches to reduce the appeal of conspiracy theories in general among
the public may be based in the emotional and social nature of conspiratorial
beliefs. For example, interventions that promote [analytical
thinking](/wiki/Analytical\_thinking "Analytical thinking") in the general
public are likely to be effective. Another approach is to intervene in ways
that decrease [negative emotions](/wiki/Negative\_emotion "Negative emotion"),
and specifically to improve feelings of personal hope and empowerment.[47]
