### Particle physics and the Standard
Model[[edit](/w/index.php?title=History\_of\_physics&action=edit&section=32
"Edit section: Particle physics and the Standard Model")]

Main articles: [History of subatomic
physics](/wiki/History\_of\_subatomic\_physics "History of subatomic physics")
and [Standard Model](/wiki/Standard\_Model "Standard Model")

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/00/Standard\_Model\_of\_Elementary\_Particles.svg/250px-
Standard\_Model\_of\_Elementary\_Particles.svg.png)](/wiki/File:Standard\_Model\_of\_Elementary\_Particles.svg)The
[Standard Model](/wiki/Standard\_Model "Standard Model").
[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/e6/Chien-
Shiung\_Wu\_%281912-1997%29\_in\_1958.jpg/220px-Chien-
Shiung\_Wu\_%281912-1997%29\_in\_1958.jpg)](/wiki/File:Chien-
Shiung\_Wu\_\(1912-1997\)\_in\_1958.jpg)Chien-Shiung Wu worked on parity violation
in 1956 and announced her results in January 1957.[69]

When [parity](/wiki/Parity\_\(physics\) "Parity \(physics\)") was broken in
weak interactions by [Chien-Shiung Wu](/wiki/Chien-Shiung\_Wu "Chien-Shiung
Wu") in her [experiment](/wiki/Wu\_experiment "Wu experiment"), a series of
discoveries were created thereafter.[70] The interaction of these particles by
[scattering](/wiki/Scattering "Scattering") and [decay](/wiki/Particle\_decay
"Particle decay") provided a key to new fundamental quantum theories. [Murray
Gell-Mann](/wiki/Murray\_Gell-Mann "Murray Gell-Mann") and [Yuval
Ne'eman](/wiki/Yuval\_Ne%27eman "Yuval Ne'eman") brought some order to these
new particles by classifying them according to certain qualities, beginning
with what Gell-Mann referred to as the "[Eightfold
Way](/wiki/Eightfold\_way\_\(physics\) "Eightfold way \(physics\)")". While its
further development, the [quark model](/wiki/Quark\_model "Quark model"), at
first seemed inadequate to describe [strong nuclear
forces](/wiki/Strong\_interaction "Strong interaction"), allowing the temporary
rise of competing theories such as the [S-Matrix](/wiki/S-Matrix "S-Matrix"),
the establishment of [quantum chromodynamics](/wiki/Quantum\_chromodynamics
"Quantum chromodynamics") in the 1970s finalized a set of fundamental and
exchange particles, which allowed for the establishment of a "standard model"
based on the mathematics of [gauge invariance](/wiki/Gauge\_theory "Gauge
theory"), which successfully described all forces except for gravitation, and
which remains generally accepted within its domain of application.[66]

The Standard Model, based on the [Yang–Mills
theory](/wiki/Yang%E2%80%93Mills\_theory "Yang–Mills theory")[71] groups the
[electroweak interaction](/wiki/Electroweak\_interaction "Electroweak
interaction") theory and [quantum chromodynamics](/wiki/Quantum\_chromodynamics
"Quantum chromodynamics") into a structure denoted by the [gauge
group](/wiki/Gauge\_group "Gauge group") SU(3)×SU(2)×U(1). The formulation of
the unification of the electromagnetic and [weak
interactions](/wiki/Weak\_interaction "Weak interaction") in the standard model
is due to [Abdus Salam](/wiki/Abdus\_Salam "Abdus Salam"), [Steven
Weinberg](/wiki/Steven\_Weinberg "Steven Weinberg") and, subsequently, [Sheldon
Glashow](/wiki/Sheldon\_Glashow "Sheldon Glashow"). Electroweak theory was
later confirmed experimentally (by observation of [neutral weak
currents](/wiki/Neutral\_current "Neutral current")),[72][73][74][75] and
distinguished by the 1979 Nobel Prize in Physics.[76]

Since the 1970s, fundamental particle physics has provided insights into early
universe [cosmology](/wiki/Cosmology "Cosmology"), particularly the [Big
Bang](/wiki/Big\_Bang "Big Bang") theory proposed as a consequence of
Einstein's [general theory of relativity](/wiki/General\_relativity "General
relativity"). However, starting in the 1990s, astronomical observations have
also provided new challenges, such as the need for new explanations of
galactic stability ("[dark matter](/wiki/Dark\_matter "Dark matter")") and the
[apparent acceleration in the expansion of the
universe](/wiki/Accelerating\_universe "Accelerating universe") ("[dark
energy](/wiki/Dark\_energy "Dark energy")").

While accelerators have confirmed most aspects of the Standard Model by
detecting expected particle interactions at various collision energies, no
theory reconciling general relativity with the Standard Model has yet been
found, although [supersymmetry](/wiki/Supersymmetry "Supersymmetry") and
[string theory](/wiki/String\_theory "String theory") were believed by many
theorists to be a promising avenue forward. The [Large Hadron
Collider](/wiki/Large\_Hadron\_Collider "Large Hadron Collider"), however, which
began operating in 2008, has failed to find any evidence that is supportive of
supersymmetry and string theory.[77]
