### Extra dimensions
[[edit](/w/index.php?title=String\_theory&action=edit&section=4 "Edit section:
Extra dimensions")]

[![A tubular surface and corresponding one-dimensional
curve.](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f5/Compactification\_example.svg/220px-
Compactification\_example.svg.png)](/wiki/File:Compactification\_example.svg)An
example of [compactification](/wiki/Compactification\_\(physics\)
"Compactification \(physics\)"): At large distances, a two dimensional surface
with one circular dimension looks one-dimensional.

In everyday life, there are three familiar dimensions (3D) of space: height,
width and length. Einstein's general theory of relativity treats time as a
dimension on par with the three spatial dimensions; in general relativity,
space and time are not modeled as separate entities but are instead unified to
a four-dimensional (4D) [spacetime](/wiki/Spacetime "Spacetime"). In this
framework, the phenomenon of gravity is viewed as a consequence of the
geometry of spacetime.[19]

In spite of the fact that the Universe is well described by 4D spacetime,
there are several reasons why physicists consider theories in other
dimensions. In some cases, by modeling spacetime in a different number of
dimensions, a theory becomes more mathematically tractable, and one can
perform calculations and gain general insights more easily.[b] There are also
situations where theories in two or three spacetime dimensions are useful for
describing phenomena in condensed matter physics.[13] Finally, there exist
scenarios in which there could actually be more than 4D of spacetime which
have nonetheless managed to escape detection.[20]

String theories require [extra dimensions](/wiki/Extra\_dimensions "Extra
dimensions") of spacetime for their mathematical consistency. In bosonic
string theory, spacetime is 26-dimensional, while in superstring theory it is
10-dimensional, and in [M-theory](/wiki/M-theory "M-theory") it is
11-dimensional. In order to describe real physical phenomena using string
theory, one must therefore imagine scenarios in which these extra dimensions
would not be observed in experiments.[21]

[![Visualization of a complex mathematical surface with many convolutions and
self
intersections.](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f3/Calabi\_yau.jpg/220px-
Calabi\_yau.jpg)](/wiki/File:Calabi\_yau.jpg)A cross section of a quintic
[Calabi–Yau manifold](/wiki/Calabi%E2%80%93Yau\_manifold "Calabi–Yau manifold")

[Compactification](/wiki/Compactification\_\(physics\) "Compactification
\(physics\)") is one way of modifying the number of dimensions in a physical
theory. In compactification, some of the extra dimensions are assumed to
"close up" on themselves to form circles.[22] In the limit where these curled
up dimensions become very small, one obtains a theory in which spacetime has
effectively a lower number of dimensions. A standard analogy for this is to
consider a multidimensional object such as a garden hose. If the hose is
viewed from a sufficient distance, it appears to have only one dimension, its
length. However, as one approaches the hose, one discovers that it contains a
second dimension, its circumference. Thus, an ant crawling on the surface of
the hose would move in two dimensions.

Compactification can be used to construct models in which spacetime is
effectively four-dimensional. However, not every way of compactifying the
extra dimensions produces a model with the right properties to describe
nature. In a viable model of particle physics, the compact extra dimensions
must be shaped like a [Calabi–Yau manifold](/wiki/Calabi%E2%80%93Yau\_manifold
"Calabi–Yau manifold").[22] A Calabi–Yau manifold is a special
[space](/wiki/Topological\_space "Topological space") which is typically taken
to be six-dimensional in applications to string theory. It is named after
mathematicians [Eugenio Calabi](/wiki/Eugenio\_Calabi "Eugenio Calabi") and
[Shing-Tung Yau](/wiki/Shing-Tung\_Yau "Shing-Tung Yau").[23]

Another approach to reducing the number of dimensions is the so-called [brane-
world](/wiki/Brane\_cosmology "Brane cosmology") scenario. In this approach,
physicists assume that the observable universe is a four-dimensional subspace
of a higher dimensional space. In such models, the force-carrying bosons of
particle physics arise from open strings with endpoints attached to the four-
dimensional subspace, while gravity arises from closed strings propagating
through the larger ambient space. This idea plays an important role in
attempts to develop models of real-world physics based on string theory, and
it provides a natural explanation for the weakness of gravity compared to the
other fundamental forces.[24]
