### Applications to quantum
gravity[[edit](/w/index.php?title=String\_theory&action=edit&section=15 "Edit
section: Applications to quantum gravity")]

The discovery of the AdS/CFT correspondence was a major advance in physicists'
understanding of string theory and quantum gravity. One reason for this is
that the correspondence provides a formulation of string theory in terms of
quantum field theory, which is well understood by comparison. Another reason
is that it provides a general framework in which physicists can study and
attempt to resolve the paradoxes of black holes.[53]

In 1975, Stephen Hawking published a calculation which suggested that black
holes are not completely black but emit a dim radiation due to quantum effects
near the [event horizon](/wiki/Event\_horizon "Event horizon").[56] At first,
Hawking's result posed a problem for theorists because it suggested that black
holes destroy information. More precisely, Hawking's calculation seemed to
conflict with one of the basic [postulates of quantum
mechanics](/wiki/Postulates\_of\_quantum\_mechanics "Postulates of quantum
mechanics"), which states that physical systems evolve in time according to
the [Schrödinger equation](/wiki/Schr%C3%B6dinger\_equation "Schrödinger
equation"). This property is usually referred to as
[unitarity](/wiki/Unitarity\_\(physics\) "Unitarity \(physics\)") of time
evolution. The apparent contradiction between Hawking's calculation and the
unitarity postulate of quantum mechanics came to be known as the [black hole
information paradox](/wiki/Black\_hole\_information\_paradox "Black hole
information paradox").[75]

The AdS/CFT correspondence resolves the black hole information paradox, at
least to some extent, because it shows how a black hole can evolve in a manner
consistent with quantum mechanics in some contexts. Indeed, one can consider
black holes in the context of the AdS/CFT correspondence, and any such black
hole corresponds to a configuration of particles on the boundary of anti-de
Sitter space.[76] These particles obey the usual rules of quantum mechanics
and in particular evolve in a unitary fashion, so the black hole must also
evolve in a unitary fashion, respecting the principles of quantum
mechanics.[77] In 2005, Hawking announced that the paradox had been settled in
favor of information conservation by the AdS/CFT correspondence, and he
suggested a concrete mechanism by which black holes might preserve
information.[78]
