#### Special
relativity[[edit](/w/index.php?title=History\_of\_physics&action=edit&section=26
"Edit section: Special relativity")]

Further information: [History of special
relativity](/wiki/History\_of\_special\_relativity "History of special
relativity")

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d1/GPB\_circling\_earth.jpg/220px-
GPB\_circling\_earth.jpg)](/wiki/File:GPB\_circling\_earth.jpg)Einstein proposed
that [gravitation](/wiki/Gravitation "Gravitation") is a result of
[masses](/wiki/Mass "Mass") (or their equivalent energies) [curving
("bending")](/wiki/Curvature\_of\_spacetime "Curvature of spacetime") the
[spacetime](/wiki/Spacetime "Spacetime") in which they exist, altering the
paths they follow within it.

Einstein argued that the speed of light was a constant in all [inertial
reference frames](/wiki/Inertial\_frame\_of\_reference "Inertial frame of
reference") and that electromagnetic laws should remain valid independent of
reference frame—assertions which rendered the ether "superfluous" to physical
theory, and that held that observations of time and length varied relative to
how the observer was moving with respect to the object being measured (what
came to be called the "[special theory of relativity](/wiki/Special\_relativity
"Special relativity")"). It also followed that mass and energy were
interchangeable quantities according to the equation [\_E\_ =\_mc\_
2](/wiki/Mass%E2%80%93energy\_equivalence "Mass–energy equivalence"). In
another paper published the same year, Einstein asserted that electromagnetic
radiation was transmitted in discrete quantities ("[quanta](/wiki/Quantum
"Quantum")"), according to a constant that the theoretical physicist [Max
Planck](/wiki/Max\_Planck "Max Planck") had posited in 1900 to arrive at an
accurate theory for the distribution of [blackbody
radiation](/wiki/Blackbody\_radiation "Blackbody radiation")—an assumption that
explained the strange properties of the photoelectric effect.

The special theory of relativity is a formulation of the relationship between
physical observations and the concepts of space and time. The theory arose out
of contradictions between electromagnetism and Newtonian mechanics and had
great impact on both those areas. The original historical issue was whether it
was meaningful to discuss the electromagnetic wave-carrying "ether" and motion
relative to it and also whether one could detect such motion, as was
unsuccessfully attempted in the Michelson–Morley experiment. Einstein
demolished these questions and the ether concept in his special theory of
relativity. However, his basic formulation does not involve detailed
electromagnetic theory. It arises out of the question: "What is time?" Newton,
in the \_[Principia](/wiki/Philosophi%C3%A6\_Naturalis\_Principia\_Mathematica
"Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica")\_ (1686), had given an
unambiguous answer: "Absolute, true, and mathematical time, of itself, and
from its own nature, flows equably without relation to anything external, and
by another name is called duration." This definition is basic to all classical
physics.

Einstein had the genius to question it, and found that it was incomplete.
Instead, each "observer" necessarily makes use of his or her own scale of
time, and for two observers in relative motion, their time-scales will differ.
This induces a related effect on position measurements. Space and time become
intertwined concepts, fundamentally dependent on the observer. Each observer
presides over his or her own space-time framework or coordinate system. There
being no absolute frame of reference, all observers of given events make
different but equally valid (and reconcilable) measurements. What remains
absolute is stated in Einstein's relativity postulate: "The basic laws of
physics are identical for two observers who have a constant relative velocity
with respect to each other."

Special relativity had a profound effect on physics: started as a rethinking
of the theory of electromagnetism, it found a new [symmetry
law](/wiki/Symmetry\_\(physics\) "Symmetry \(physics\)") of nature, now called
\_[Poincaré symmetry](/wiki/Poincar%C3%A9\_symmetry "Poincaré symmetry")\_ , that
replaced the old [Galilean symmetry](/wiki/Galilean\_symmetry "Galilean
symmetry").

Special relativity exerted another long-lasting effect on
[dynamics](/wiki/Dynamics\_\(physics\) "Dynamics \(physics\)"). Although
initially it was credited with the "unification of mass and energy", it became
evident that [relativistic dynamics](/wiki/Relativistic\_dynamics "Relativistic
dynamics") established a firm \_distinction\_ between [rest
mass](/wiki/Rest\_mass "Rest mass"), which is an invariant (observer
independent) property of a [particle](/wiki/Particle "Particle") or system of
particles, and the [energy](/wiki/Energy "Energy") and momentum of a system.
The latter two are separately [conserved](/wiki/Conservation\_law\_\(physics\)
"Conservation law \(physics\)") in all situations but not invariant with
respect to different observers. The term \_mass\_ in [particle
physics](/wiki/Particle\_physics "Particle physics") underwent a [semantic
change](/wiki/Semantic\_change "Semantic change"), and since the late 20th
century it almost exclusively denotes the [rest (or \_invariant\_)
mass](/wiki/Invariant\_mass "Invariant mass").

Further information: [mass in special
relativity](/wiki/Mass\_in\_special\_relativity "Mass in special relativity")
