Scientific field of study

For other uses, see [Physics
(disambiguation)](/wiki/Physics\_\(disambiguation\) "Physics
\(disambiguation\)").

Not to be confused with [Physis](/wiki/Physis "Physis").

Part of a series on 
--- 
Physics 
[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/6f/Stylised\_atom\_with\_three\_Bohr\_model\_orbits\_and\_stylised\_nucleus.svg/100px-
Stylised\_atom\_with\_three\_Bohr\_model\_orbits\_and\_stylised\_nucleus.svg.png)](/wiki/File:Stylised\_atom\_with\_three\_Bohr\_model\_orbits\_and\_stylised\_nucleus.svg)\*\*The
fundamental science\*\* 
 
 \* [Index](/wiki/Index\_of\_physics\_articles "Index of physics articles")
 \* [Outline](/wiki/Outline\_of\_physics "Outline of physics")
 \* [Glossary](/wiki/Glossary\_of\_physics "Glossary of physics")

 \* [History](/wiki/History\_of\_physics "History of physics") ([timeline](/wiki/Timeline\_of\_fundamental\_physics\_discoveries "Timeline of fundamental physics discoveries"))

 
[Branches](/wiki/Branches\_of\_physics "Branches of physics")

 \* [Acoustics](/wiki/Acoustics "Acoustics")
 \* [Astrophysics](/wiki/Astrophysics "Astrophysics")
 \* [Atomic physics](/wiki/Atomic\_physics "Atomic physics")
 \* [Biophysics](/wiki/Biophysics "Biophysics")
 \* [Classical physics](/wiki/Classical\_physics "Classical physics")
 \* [Electromagnetism](/wiki/Electromagnetism "Electromagnetism")
 \* [Geophysics](/wiki/Geophysics "Geophysics")
 \* [Mechanics](/wiki/Mechanics "Mechanics")
 \* [Modern physics](/wiki/Modern\_physics "Modern physics")
 \* [Nuclear physics](/wiki/Nuclear\_physics "Nuclear physics")
 \* [Optics](/wiki/Optics "Optics")
 \* [Thermodynamics](/wiki/Thermodynamics "Thermodynamics")

 
Research

 \* [Physicist](/wiki/Physicist "Physicist") ([list](/wiki/List\_of\_physicists "List of physicists"))
 \* [List of physics awards](/wiki/List\_of\_physics\_awards "List of physics awards")
 \* [List of journals](/wiki/List\_of\_physics\_journals "List of physics journals")
 \* [List of unsolved problems](/wiki/List\_of\_unsolved\_problems\_in\_physics "List of unsolved problems in physics")

 
 
 \* [![icon](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/6f/Stylised\_atom\_with\_three\_Bohr\_model\_orbits\_and\_stylised\_nucleus.svg/14px-Stylised\_atom\_with\_three\_Bohr\_model\_orbits\_and\_stylised\_nucleus.svg.png)](/wiki/File:Stylised\_atom\_with\_three\_Bohr\_model\_orbits\_and\_stylised\_nucleus.svg) [Physics portal](/wiki/Portal:Physics "Portal:Physics")
 \* ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/9/96/Symbol\_category\_class.svg/16px-Symbol\_category\_class.svg.png) [Category](/wiki/Category:Physics "Category:Physics")

 
 
 \* [v](/wiki/Template:TopicTOC-Physics "Template:TopicTOC-Physics")
 \* [t](/wiki/Template\_talk:TopicTOC-Physics "Template talk:TopicTOC-Physics")
 \* [e](/wiki/Special:EditPage/Template:TopicTOC-Physics "Special:EditPage/Template:TopicTOC-Physics")

 
 
\*\*Physics\*\* is the [natural science](/wiki/Natural\_science "Natural science")
of [matter](/wiki/Matter "Matter"), involving the study of matter, its
[fundamental constituents](/wiki/Elementary\_particle "Elementary particle"),
its [motion](/wiki/Motion "Motion") and behavior through [space and
time](/wiki/Spacetime "Spacetime"), and the related entities of
[energy](/wiki/Energy "Energy") and [force](/wiki/Force "Force").[1] Physics
is one of the most fundamental [scientific](/wiki/Science "Science")
disciplines.[2][3][4] A scientist who specializes in the field of physics is
called a [physicist](/wiki/Physicist "Physicist").

Physics is one of the oldest [academic disciplines](/wiki/Academic\_discipline
"Academic discipline") and, through its inclusion of
[astronomy](/wiki/Astronomy "Astronomy"), perhaps \_the\_ oldest.[5] Over much
of the past two millennia, physics, [chemistry](/wiki/Chemistry "Chemistry"),
[biology](/wiki/Biology "Biology"), and certain branches of mathematics were a
part of [natural philosophy](/wiki/Natural\_philosophy "Natural philosophy"),
but during the [Scientific Revolution](/wiki/Scientific\_Revolution "Scientific
Revolution") in the 17th century these natural sciences emerged as unique
research endeavors in their own right.[a] Physics intersects with many
[interdisciplinary](/wiki/Interdisciplinarity "Interdisciplinarity") areas of
research, such as [biophysics](/wiki/Biophysics "Biophysics") and [quantum
chemistry](/wiki/Quantum\_chemistry "Quantum chemistry"), and the boundaries of
physics are not rigidly defined. New ideas in physics often explain the
fundamental mechanisms studied by other sciences[2] and suggest new avenues of
research in these and other academic disciplines such as mathematics and
philosophy.

Advances in physics often enable new [technologies](/wiki/Technology
"Technology"). For example, advances in the understanding of
[electromagnetism](/wiki/Electromagnetism "Electromagnetism"), [solid-state
physics](/wiki/Solid-state\_physics "Solid-state physics"), and [nuclear
physics](/wiki/Nuclear\_physics "Nuclear physics") led directly to the
development of new products that have dramatically transformed modern-day
society, such as television, computers, [domestic
appliances](/wiki/Domestic\_appliance "Domestic appliance"), and [nuclear
weapons](/wiki/Nuclear\_weapon "Nuclear weapon");[2] advances in
[thermodynamics](/wiki/Thermodynamics "Thermodynamics") led to the development
of industrialization; and advances in [mechanics](/wiki/Mechanics "Mechanics")
inspired the development of [calculus](/wiki/Calculus "Calculus").

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/6f/CMB\_Timeline300\_no\_WMAP.jpg/400px-
CMB\_Timeline300\_no\_WMAP.jpg)](/wiki/File:CMB\_Timeline300\_no\_WMAP.jpg)The
expansion of the universe according to the [Big Bang](/wiki/Big\_Bang "Big
Bang") theory in physics
