## Status and
conservation[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Cassowary&action=edit&section=10 "Edit
section: Status and conservation")]

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b9/Road\_sign\_-
Cairns%2C\_Queensland%2C\_Australia-26Oct2007.jpg/220px-Road\_sign\_-
Cairns%2C\_Queensland%2C\_Australia-26Oct2007.jpg)](/wiki/File:Road\_sign\_-
Cairns,\_Queensland,\_Australia-26Oct2007.jpg)A road sign in
[Cairns](/wiki/Cairns "Cairns"), [Queensland](/wiki/Queensland "Queensland"),
Australia
[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/54/Southern\_Cassowary\_7071.jpg/220px-
Southern\_Cassowary\_7071.jpg)](/wiki/File:Southern\_Cassowary\_7071.jpg)A free-
ranging cassowary wandering in a tourist park at Etty Bay, Queensland

The southern cassowary is endangered in Queensland. Kofron and Chapman, when
they assessed the decline of this species, found that of the former cassowary
habitat, only 20–25% remains. Habitat loss and fragmentation is the primary
cause of decline.[64] They then studied 140 cases of cassowary mortality, and
found that motor-vehicle strikes accounted for 55% of the deaths, and dog
attacks produced another 18%. Remaining causes of death included hunting (five
cases), entanglement in wire (one case), the removal of cassowaries that
attacked humans (four cases), and natural causes (18 cases), including
tuberculosis (four cases). The cause for 14 cases was indicated as "for
unknown reasons".[64]

Hand feeding cassowaries poses a significant threat to their survival because
it lures them into suburban areas. There, the birds are more susceptible to
encounters with vehicles and dogs.[65] Contact with humans encourages
cassowaries to take food from picnic tables. [Feral pigs](/wiki/Feral\_pig
"Feral pig") also are a significant threat to their survival. They destroy
nests and eggs of cassowaries, but their worst effect is as competitors for
food, which may be catastrophic for the cassowaries during lean times.[66][67]

In February 2011, [Cyclone Yasi](/wiki/Cyclone\_Yasi "Cyclone Yasi") destroyed
a large area of cassowary habitat, endangering 200 of the birds – about 10% of
the total Australian population.[68]

The Mission Beach community in far north Queensland holds an annual Cassowary
Festival in September, where funds are raised to map the bird's habitat.[69]
