#### Conspiracy
theorists[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Conspiracy\_theory&action=edit&section=16
"Edit section: Conspiracy theorists")]

It is much more difficult to convince people who already believe in conspiracy
theories.[48][50] Conspiracist belief systems are not based on external
evidence, but instead use [circular logic](/wiki/Circular\_logic "Circular
logic") where every belief is supported by other conspiracist beliefs.[50] In
addition, conspiracy theories have a "self-sealing" nature, in which the types
of arguments used to support them make them resistant to questioning from
others.[48]

Characteristics of successful strategies for reaching conspiracy theorists
have been divided into several broad categories: 1) Arguments can be presented
by "trusted messengers", such as people who were formerly members of an
extremist group. 2) Since conspiracy theorists think of themselves as people
who value critical thinking, this can be affirmed and then redirected to
encourage being more critical when analyzing the conspiracy theory. 3)
Approaches demonstrate empathy, and are based on building understanding
together, which is supported by modeling open-mindedness in order to encourage
the conspiracy theorists to do likewise. 4) The conspiracy theories are not
attacked with ridicule or aggressive deconstruction, and interactions are not
treated like an argument to be won; this approach can work with the general
public, but among conspiracy theorists it may simply be rejected.[50]

Interventions that reduce feelings of uncertainty, anxiety, or powerlessness
result in a reduction in conspiracy beliefs.[41] Other possible strategies to
mitigate the effect of conspiracy theories include education, media literacy,
and increasing governmental openness and transparency.[96]

One approach describes conspiracy theories as resulting from a "crippled
epistemology", in which a person encounters or accepts very few relevant
sources of information.[48][98] A conspiracy theory is more likely to appear
justified to people with a limited "informational environment" who only
encounter misleading information. These people may be
"[epistemologically](/wiki/Epistemology "Epistemology") isolated" in [self-
enclosed networks](/wiki/Filter\_bubble "Filter bubble"). From the perspective
of people within these networks, disconnected from the information available
to the rest of society, believing in conspiracy theories may appear to be
justified.[48][98] In these cases, the solution would be to break the group's
informational isolation.[48]

Due to the relationship between conspiracy theories and political extremism,
the academic literature on [deradicalization](/wiki/Deradicalization
"Deradicalization") is also important.[50]
