### Backfire
effects[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Conspiracy\_theory&action=edit&section=20
"Edit section: Backfire effects")]

It has been suggested that directly countering
[misinformation](/wiki/Misinformation "Misinformation") can be
counterproductive. For example, since conspiracy theories can reinterpret
disconfirming information as part of their narrative, refuting a claim can
result in accidentally reinforcing it,[62][103] which is referred to as a
"backfire effect".[104] In addition, publishing criticism of conspiracy
theories can result in legitimizing them.[93] In this context, possible
interventions include carefully selecting which conspiracy theories to refute,
requesting additional analyses from independent observers, and introducing
cognitive diversity into conspiratorial communities by undermining their poor
epistemology.[93] Any legitimization effect might also be reduced by
responding to more conspiracy theories rather than fewer.[48]

There are psychological mechanisms by which backfire effects could potentially
occur, but the evidence on this topic is mixed, and backfire effects are very
rare in practice.[97][104][105] A 2020 review of the scientific literature on
backfire effects found that there have been widespread [failures to
replicate](/wiki/Replication\_crisis "Replication crisis") their existence,
even under conditions that would be theoretically favorable to observing
them.[104] Due to the lack of [reproducibility](/wiki/Reproducibility
"Reproducibility"), as of
2020[[update]](https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Conspiracy\_theory&action=edit)
most researchers believe that backfire effects are either unlikely to occur on
the broader population level, or they only occur in very specific
circumstances, or they do not exist.[104] Brendan Nyhan, one of the
researchers who initially proposed the occurrence of backfire effects, wrote
in 2021 that the persistence of misinformation is most likely due to other
factors.[105]

In general, people do reject conspiracy theories when they learn about their
contradictions and lack of evidence.[9] For most people, corrections and fact-
checking are very unlikely to have a negative impact, and there is no specific
group of people in which backfire effects have been consistently
observed.[104] Presenting people with factual corrections, or highlighting the
logical contradictions in conspiracy theories, has been demonstrated to have a
positive effect in many circumstances.[47][103] For example, this has been
studied in the case of informing believers in [9/11 conspiracy
theories](/wiki/9/11\_conspiracy\_theories "9/11 conspiracy theories") about
statements by actual experts and witnesses.[47] One possibility is that
criticism is most likely to backfire if it challenges someone's worldview or
identity. This suggests that an effective approach may be to provide criticism
while avoiding such challenges.[103]
