### Government
policies[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Conspiracy\_theory&action=edit&section=18
"Edit section: Government policies")]

The primary defense against conspiracy theories is to maintain an [open
society](/wiki/Open\_society "Open society"), in which many sources of reliable
information are available, and government sources are known to be credible
rather than propaganda. Additionally, independent nongovernmental
organizations are able to correct misinformation without requiring people to
trust the government.[48] The absence of [civil rights](/wiki/Civil\_rights
"Civil rights") and [civil liberties](/wiki/Civil\_liberties "Civil liberties")
reduces the number of information sources available to the population, which
may lead people to support conspiracy theories.[48] Since the credibility of
conspiracy theories can be increased if governments act dishonestly or
otherwise engage in objectionable actions, avoiding such actions is also a
relevant strategy.[96]

Joseph Pierre has said that mistrust in authoritative institutions is the core
component underlying many conspiracy theories and that this mistrust creates
an epistemic vacuum and makes individuals searching for answers vulnerable to
misinformation. Therefore, one possible solution is offering consumers a seat
at the table to mend their mistrust in institutions.[100] Regarding the
challenges of this approach, Pierre has said, "The challenge with
acknowledging areas of uncertainty within a public sphere is that doing so can
be weaponized to reinforce a post-truth view of the world in which everything
is debatable, and any counter-position is just as valid. Although I like to
think of myself as a middle of the road kind of individual, it is important to
keep in mind that the truth does not always lie in the middle of a debate,
whether we are talking about climate change, vaccines, or antipsychotic
medications."[101]

Researchers have recommended that public policies should take into account the
possibility of conspiracy theories relating to any policy or policy area, and
prepare to combat them in advance.[96][9] Conspiracy theories have suddenly
arisen in the context of policy issues as disparate as land-use laws and
bicycle-sharing programs.[96] In the case of public communications by
government officials, factors that improve the effectiveness of communication
include using clear and simple messages, and using messengers which are
trusted by the target population. Government information about conspiracy
theories is more likely to be believed if the messenger is perceived as being
part of someone's [in-group](/wiki/In-group "In-group"). Official
representatives may be more effective if they share characteristics with the
target groups, such as ethnicity.[96]

In addition, when the government communicates with citizens to combat
conspiracy theories, online methods are more efficient compared to other
methods such as print publications. This also promotes transparency, can
improve a message's perceived trustworthiness, and is more effective at
reaching underrepresented demographics. However, as of
2019[[update]](https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Conspiracy\_theory&action=edit),
many governmental websites do not take full advantage of the available
information-sharing opportunities. Similarly, social media accounts need to be
used effectively in order to achieve meaningful communication with the public,
such as by responding to requests that citizens send to those accounts. Other
steps include adapting messages to the communication styles used on the social
media platform in question, and promoting a culture of openness. Since mixed
messaging can support conspiracy theories, it is also important to avoid
conflicting accounts, such as by ensuring the accuracy of messages on the
social media accounts of individual members of the organization.[96]
