### Attacks[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Cassowary&action=edit&section=15 "Edit
section: Attacks")]

Cassowaries have a reputation for being dangerous to people and domestic
animals. During [World War II](/wiki/World\_War\_II "World War II"), American
and Australian troops stationed in New Guinea were warned to steer clear of
them. In his 1958 book \_Living Birds of the World\_ , ornithologist [Ernest
Thomas Gilliard](/wiki/Ernest\_Thomas\_Gilliard "Ernest Thomas Gilliard") wrote:

> The inner or second of the three toes is fitted with a long, straight,
> murderous nail which can sever an arm or eviscerate an abdomen with ease.
> There are many records of natives being killed by this bird.[79]

This assessment of the danger posed by cassowaries has been repeated in print
by authors, including [Gregory S. Paul](/wiki/Gregory\_S.\_Paul "Gregory S.
Paul")[80] and [Jared Diamond](/wiki/Jared\_Diamond "Jared Diamond").[81] A
2003 historical study of 221 cassowary attacks showed that 150 had been
against humans; 75% of these had been from cassowaries that had been fed by
people, 71% of the time the bird had chased or charged the victim, and 15% of
the time they kicked. Of the attacks, 73% involved the birds expecting or
snatching food, 5% involved defending their natural food sources, 15% involved
defending themselves, and 7% involved defending their chicks or eggs. Only one
human death was reported among those 150 attacks.[82]

The first documented human death caused by a cassowary was on April 6, 1926.
In Australia, 16-year-old Phillip McClean and his brother, age 13, came across
a cassowary on their property and decided to try to kill it by striking it
with clubs. The bird kicked the younger boy, who fell and ran away as his
older brother struck the bird. The older McClean then tripped and fell to the
ground. While he was on the ground, the cassowary kicked him in the neck,
opening a 1.25-centimetre (0.49 in) wound that severed his [jugular
vein](/wiki/Jugular\_vein "Jugular vein"). The boy died of his injuries shortly
thereafter.[83][84]

Cassowary strikes to the abdomen are among the rarest of all, but in one case
in 1995, a dog was kicked in the belly. The blow left no puncture, but severe
bruising occurred. The dog later died from an apparent intestinal rupture.[83]

Another human death due to a cassowary was recorded in Florida on April 12,
2019. The bird's owner, a 75-year-old man who had raised the animal, was
apparently clawed to death after he fell to the ground.[9][85][86][87][88][89]
