## Effects[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Child-on-
child\_sexual\_abuse&action=edit&section=3 "Edit section: Effects")]

Children who were sexually victimized by other [minors](/wiki/Minor\_\(law\)
"Minor \(law\)"), including inter-sibling abuse, show largely the same
problems as children victimized by adults, including [anxiety
disorders](/wiki/Anxiety\_disorder "Anxiety disorder"),
[depression](/wiki/Clinical\_depression "Clinical depression"), [substance
abuse](/wiki/Substance\_abuse "Substance abuse"), [suicide](/wiki/Suicide
"Suicide"), [eating disorders](/wiki/Eating\_disorder "Eating disorder"),
[post-traumatic stress disorder](/wiki/Post-traumatic\_stress\_disorder "Post-
traumatic stress disorder"), [sleep disorders](/wiki/Sleep\_disorder "Sleep
disorder") and difficulty trusting peers in the context of
relationships.[1][13] The victim often thinks that the act was normal,
including thinking they were the initiator or that they went through the act
voluntarily.[4]

Major factors that affect the severity of symptoms include the use of force or
coercion, the frequency of the abuse, and the invasiveness of the act.[14] An
increased risk of [victimization](/wiki/Victimization "Victimization") later
in life has also been reported.[15]

The term \_minor sex offenders\_ may be used for children under 18 years of age
who have initiated any non-consensual sexual activity with another person.
This population may be viewed as a younger version of sexual perpetrators and
may be assessed as part of a same group, when they represent a significant
[heterogenous](/wiki/Heterogenous "Heterogenous") group. For example, these
children tend to exhibit different motivations for their actions than adult
sexual offenders and they tend to respond more favorably to treatment.[11]
