### Sheldon and Amy's
relationship[[edit](/w/index.php?title=The\_Big\_Bang\_Theory&action=edit&section=11
"Edit section: Sheldon and Amy's relationship")]

In the third-season finale, Raj and Howard sign Sheldon up for online dating
to find a woman compatible with Sheldon, and they discover
[neurobiologist](/wiki/Neuroscientist "Neuroscientist") Amy Farrah Fowler.
Like Sheldon, she has a history of social ineptitude and participates in
online dating only to fulfill an agreement with her mother. This spawns a
story line in which Sheldon and Amy communicate daily while insisting to
Leonard and Penny that they are not romantically involved. In "The Agreement
Dissection", Sheldon and Amy talk in her apartment after a night of dancing,
and she kisses him on the lips. Instead of getting annoyed, Sheldon says
"fascinating" and later asks Amy to be his girlfriend in "The Flaming Spittoon
Acquisition". The same night he draws up "The Relationship Agreement" to
verify the ground rules of him as her boyfriend and vice versa (similar to his
"Roommate Agreement" with Leonard). Amy agrees but later regrets not having
had a lawyer read through it.

In "The Launch Acceleration", Amy tries to use her "neurobiology bag of
tricks" to increase the attraction between herself and Sheldon. Her efforts
appear to be working because Sheldon is not happy, but he makes no attempt to
stop her. In the fifth-season finale, "The Countdown Reflection", Sheldon
takes Amy's hand as Howard is launched into space. In the sixth-season
premiere, "The Date Night Variable", after a dinner in which Sheldon fails to
live up to this expectation, Amy gives Sheldon an ultimatum that their
relationship is over unless he tells her something from his heart. Amy accepts
Sheldon's romantic speech even after learning that it is a line from the first
\_Spider-Man\_ movie. In "The Cooper/Kripke Inversion", Sheldon states that he
has been working on his discomfort about physical contact and admits that
"it's a possibility" that he could one day have sex with Amy. Amy is revealed
to have similar feelings in "The Love Spell Potential". Sheldon explains that
he never thought about intimacy with anyone before Amy.[86]

"The Locomotive Manipulation" is the first episode in which Sheldon initiates
a kiss with Amy. Although initially done in a fit of sarcasm, he discovers
that he enjoys the feeling. Consequently, Sheldon slowly starts to open up
over the rest of the season, and he starts a more intimate relationship with
Amy. However, in the season finale, Sheldon leaves town temporarily to cope
with several changes and Amy becomes distraught. However, 45 days into the
trip, Sheldon gets mugged and calls for Leonard to drive him home, only to be
confronted by Amy, who is upset over not being contacted by him in weeks. When
Sheldon admits he did not call her because he was too embarrassed to admit
that he could not make it on his own, Amy accepts that he is not perfect. In
"The Prom Equivalency", Sheldon hides in his room to avoid going to a mock
prom reenactment with her. In the resulting standoff, Amy is about to confess
that she loves Sheldon, but he surprises her by saying that he loves her too.
This prompts Amy to have a panic attack.

In the season-eight finale, Sheldon and Amy get into a fight about commitment
on their fifth anniversary. Amy tells Sheldon that she needs to think about
the future of their relationship, unaware that Sheldon was about to propose to
her. Season nine sees Sheldon harassing Amy about making up her mind until she
breaks up with him. Both struggle with singlehood and trying to be friends for
the next few weeks until they reunite in episode ten and have sex for the
first time on Amy's birthday. In season ten, Amy's apartment is flooded, and
she and Sheldon decide to move in together into Penny's apartment as part of a
five-week experiment to determine compatibility with each other's living
habits. It goes well and they decide to make the arrangement permanent.

In the Season 11 premiere, Sheldon proposes to Amy, and she accepts. The two
get married in the eleventh-season finale.
