###
Thermodynamics[[edit](/w/index.php?title=History\_of\_physics&action=edit&section=16
"Edit section: Thermodynamics")]

During the 18th century, thermodynamics was developed through the theories of
weightless ["imponderable fluids"](/wiki/Imponderable\_fluid "Imponderable
fluid"), such as heat ("caloric"), [electricity](/wiki/Electricity
"Electricity"), and [phlogiston](/wiki/Phlogiston\_theory "Phlogiston theory")
(which was rapidly overthrown as a concept following
[Lavoisier's](/wiki/Antoine-Laurent\_Lavoisier "Antoine-Laurent Lavoisier")
identification of [oxygen](/wiki/Oxygen "Oxygen") gas late in the century).
Assuming that these concepts were real fluids, their flow could be traced
through a mechanical apparatus or chemical reactions. This tradition of
experimentation led to the development of new kinds of experimental apparatus,
such as the [Leyden Jar](/wiki/Leyden\_Jar "Leyden Jar"); and new kinds of
measuring instruments, such as the [calorimeter](/wiki/Calorimeter
"Calorimeter"), and improved versions of old ones, such as the
[thermometer](/wiki/Thermometer "Thermometer"). Experiments also produced new
concepts, such as the [University of Glasgow](/wiki/University\_of\_Glasgow
"University of Glasgow") experimenter [Joseph Black](/wiki/Joseph\_Black
"Joseph Black")'s notion of [latent heat](/wiki/Latent\_heat "Latent heat") and
Philadelphia intellectual [Benjamin Franklin](/wiki/Benjamin\_Franklin
"Benjamin Franklin")'s characterization of electrical fluid as flowing between
places of excess and deficit (a concept later reinterpreted in terms of
positive and negative [charges](/wiki/Electric\_charge "Electric charge")).
Franklin also showed that lightning is electricity in 1752.

The accepted theory of heat in the 18th century viewed it as a kind of fluid,
called [caloric](/wiki/Caloric\_theory "Caloric theory"); although this theory
was later shown to be erroneous, a number of scientists adhering to it
nevertheless made important discoveries useful in developing the modern
theory, including [Joseph Black](/wiki/Joseph\_Black "Joseph Black") (1728–99)
and [Henry Cavendish](/wiki/Henry\_Cavendish "Henry Cavendish") (1731–1810).
Opposed to this caloric theory, which had been developed mainly by the
chemists, was the less accepted theory dating from Newton's time that heat is
due to the motions of the particles of a substance. This mechanical theory
gained support in 1798 from the cannon-boring experiments of Count Rumford
([Benjamin Thompson](/wiki/Benjamin\_Thompson "Benjamin Thompson")), who found
a direct relationship between heat and mechanical energy.

While it was recognized early in the 18th century that finding absolute
theories of electrostatic and magnetic force akin to Newton's principles of
motion would be an important achievement, none were forthcoming. This
impossibility only slowly disappeared as experimental practice became more
widespread and more refined in the early years of the 19th century in places
such as the newly established [Royal Institution](/wiki/Royal\_Institution
"Royal Institution") in London. Meanwhile, the analytical methods of rational
mechanics began to be applied to experimental phenomena, most influentially
with the French mathematician [Joseph Fourier](/wiki/Joseph\_Fourier "Joseph
Fourier")'s analytical treatment of the flow of heat, as published in
1822.[51][52][53] [Joseph Priestley](/wiki/Joseph\_Priestley "Joseph
Priestley") proposed an electrical inverse-square law in 1767, and [Charles-
Augustin de Coulomb](/wiki/Charles-Augustin\_de\_Coulomb "Charles-Augustin de
Coulomb") introduced the inverse-square law of
[electrostatics](/wiki/Electrostatics "Electrostatics") in 1798.

At the end of the century, the members of the [French Academy of
Sciences](/wiki/French\_Academy\_of\_Sciences "French Academy of Sciences") had
attained clear dominance in the field.[45][54][55][56] At the same time, the
experimental tradition established by Galileo and his followers persisted. The
[Royal Society](/wiki/Royal\_Society "Royal Society") and the [French Academy
of Sciences](/wiki/French\_Academy\_of\_Sciences "French Academy of Sciences")
were major centers for the performance and reporting of experimental work.
Experiments in mechanics, optics, [magnetism](/wiki/Magnetism "Magnetism"),
[static electricity](/wiki/Static\_electricity "Static electricity"),
[chemistry](/wiki/History\_of\_chemistry "History of chemistry"), and
[physiology](/wiki/Physiology "Physiology") were not clearly distinguished
from each other during the 18th century, but significant differences in
explanatory schemes and, thus, experiment design were emerging. Chemical
experimenters, for instance, defied attempts to enforce a scheme of abstract
Newtonian forces onto chemical affiliations, and instead focused on the
isolation and classification of chemical substances and reactions.[57]
