## Behaviour and
ecology[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Cassowary&action=edit&section=3 "Edit
section: Behaviour and ecology")]

Cassowaries are solitary birds except during courtship, egg-laying, and
sometimes around ample food supplies.[27] Males and females each maintain
separate territories that overlap, of a size of approximately 3 square
kilometres in one study.[37] While females move among satellite territories of
different males, they appear to remain within the same territories for most of
their lives, mating with the same, or closely related, males over the course
of their lives.[38]

Courtship and pair-bonding rituals begin with the vibratory sounds broadcast
by females. Males approach and run with their necks parallel to the ground
while making dramatic movements of their heads, which accentuate the frontal
neck region. The female approaches drumming slowly. The male crouches on the
ground, and the female either steps on the male's back for a moment before
crouching beside him in preparation for copulation, or she may attack. This is
often the case with the females pursuing the males in ritualistic chasing
behaviours that generally terminate in water. The male cassowary dives into
water and submerges himself up to his upper neck and head. The female pursues
him into the water, where he eventually drives her to the shallows, where she
crouches making ritualistic motions of her head. The two may remain in
copulation for extended periods of time. In some cases, another male may
approach and run off the first male. He will climb onto her to copulate, as
well.[\_[citation needed](/wiki/Wikipedia:Citation\_needed "Wikipedia:Citation
needed")\_]

Both male and female cassowaries do not tolerate the presence of others of the
same sex, but females are more prone to fight than males, which will generally
flee when encountering another male. While males and females may also be
territorial and confrontational, this decreases during the mating season[38]
