## Computer modeling and manual calculation, modern and classic
comparison[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Classical\_physics&action=edit&section=3
"Edit section: Computer modeling and manual calculation, modern and classic
comparison")]

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/6d/The\_two\_physic\_theories\_without\_refutation\_at\_the\_moment.jpg/350px-
The\_two\_physic\_theories\_without\_refutation\_at\_the\_moment.jpg)](/wiki/File:The\_two\_physic\_theories\_without\_refutation\_at\_the\_moment.jpg)A
computer model would use quantum theory and relativistic theory only.

Today, a computer performs millions of arithmetic operations in seconds to
solve a classical [differential equation](/wiki/Differential\_equation
"Differential equation"), while Newton (one of the fathers of the differential
calculus) would take hours to solve the same equation by manual calculation,
even if he were the discoverer of that particular equation.

Computer modeling is essential for quantum and relativistic physics. Classical
physics is considered the limit of quantum mechanics for a large number of
particles. On the other hand, [classic mechanics](/wiki/Classic\_mechanics
"Classic mechanics") is derived from [relativistic
mechanics](/wiki/Relativistic\_mechanics "Relativistic mechanics"). For
example, in many formulations from special relativity, a correction factor
(v/c)2 appears, where v is the velocity of the object and c is the speed of
light. For velocities much smaller than that of light, one can neglect the
terms with c2 and higher that appear. These formulas then reduce to the
standard definitions of Newtonian kinetic energy and momentum. This is as it
should be, for special relativity must agree with Newtonian mechanics at low
velocities. Computer modeling has to be as real as possible. Classical physics
would introduce an error as in the [superfluidity](/wiki/Superfluidity
"Superfluidity") case. In order to produce reliable models of the world, one
can not use classical physics. It is true that quantum theories consume time
and computer resources, and the equations of classical physics could be
resorted to in order to provide a quick solution, but such a solution would
lack reliability.

Computer modeling would use only the energy criteria to determine which theory
to use: relativity or quantum theory, when attempting to describe the behavior
of an object. A physicist would use a classical model to provide an
approximation before more exacting models are applied and those calculations
proceed.

In a computer model, there is no need to use the speed of the object if
classical physics is excluded. Low-energy objects would be handled by quantum
theory and high-energy objects by relativity theory.[5][6][7]
