### Theory and
experiment[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Physics&action=edit&section=18 "Edit
section: Theory and experiment")]

Main articles: [Theoretical physics](/wiki/Theoretical\_physics "Theoretical
physics") and [Experimental physics](/wiki/Experimental\_physics "Experimental
physics")

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/91/Bruce\_McCandless\_II\_during\_EVA\_in\_1984.jpg/220px-
Bruce\_McCandless\_II\_during\_EVA\_in\_1984.jpg)](/wiki/File:Bruce\_McCandless\_II\_during\_EVA\_in\_1984.jpg)The
[astronaut](/wiki/Astronaut "Astronaut") and Earth are both in [free
fall](/wiki/Free\_fall "Free fall"). (Pictured: Astronaut Bruce McCandless.)
[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/69/Lightning\_in\_Arlington.jpg/220px-
Lightning\_in\_Arlington.jpg)](/wiki/File:Lightning\_in\_Arlington.jpg)[Lightning](/wiki/Lightning
"Lightning") is an [electric current](/wiki/Electric\_current "Electric
current").

Theorists seek to develop [mathematical models](/wiki/Mathematical\_model
"Mathematical model") that both agree with existing experiments and
successfully predict future experimental results, while
[experimentalists](/wiki/Experimentalism "Experimentalism") devise and perform
experiments to test theoretical predictions and explore new phenomena.
Although [theory](/wiki/Theory "Theory") and experiment are developed
separately, they strongly affect and depend upon each other. Progress in
physics frequently comes about when experimental results defy explanation by
existing theories, prompting intense focus on applicable modelling, and when
new theories generate experimentally testable [predictions](/wiki/Prediction
"Prediction"), which inspire the development of new experiments (and often
related equipment).[62]

[Physicists](/wiki/Physicist "Physicist") who work at the interplay of theory
and experiment are called
[phenomenologists](/wiki/Phenomenology\_\(particle\_physics\) "Phenomenology
\(particle physics\)"), who study complex phenomena observed in experiment and
work to relate them to a [fundamental theory](/wiki/Theory\_of\_everything
"Theory of everything").[63]

Theoretical physics has historically taken inspiration from philosophy;
electromagnetism was unified this way.[d] Beyond the known universe, the field
of theoretical physics also deals with hypothetical issues,[e] such as
[parallel universes](/wiki/Many-worlds\_interpretation "Many-worlds
interpretation"), a [multiverse](/wiki/Multiverse "Multiverse"), and [higher
dimensions](/wiki/Higher\_dimension "Higher dimension"). Theorists invoke these
ideas in hopes of solving particular problems with existing theories; they
then explore the consequences of these ideas and work toward making testable
predictions.

Experimental physics expands, and is expanded by, engineering and technology.
Experimental physicists who are involved in [basic
research](/wiki/Basic\_research "Basic research") design and perform
experiments with equipment such as particle accelerators and
[lasers](/wiki/Laser "Laser"), whereas those involved in [applied
research](/wiki/Applied\_research "Applied research") often work in industry,
developing technologies such as [magnetic resonance
imaging](/wiki/Magnetic\_resonance\_imaging "Magnetic resonance imaging") (MRI)
and [transistors](/wiki/Transistor "Transistor").
[Feynman](/wiki/Richard\_Feynman "Richard Feynman") has noted that
experimentalists may seek areas that have not been explored well by
theorists.[64]
