### Classical
mechanics[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Quantum\_mechanics&action=edit&section=15
"Edit section: Classical mechanics")]

The rules of quantum mechanics assert that the state space of a system is a
[Hilbert space](/wiki/Hilbert\_space "Hilbert space") and that observables of
the system are [Hermitian operators](/wiki/Hermitian\_operators "Hermitian
operators") acting on vectors in that space – although they do not tell us
which Hilbert space or which operators. These can be chosen appropriately in
order to obtain a quantitative description of a quantum system, a necessary
step in making physical predictions. An important guide for making these
choices is the [correspondence principle](/wiki/Correspondence\_principle
"Correspondence principle"), a heuristic which states that the predictions of
quantum mechanics reduce to those of [classical
mechanics](/wiki/Classical\_mechanics "Classical mechanics") in the regime of
large [quantum numbers](/wiki/Quantum\_number "Quantum number").[40] One can
also start from an established classical model of a particular system, and
then try to guess the underlying quantum model that would give rise to the
classical model in the correspondence limit. This approach is known as
[quantization](/wiki/Canonical\_quantization "Canonical quantization").[41]:
299 [42]

When quantum mechanics was originally formulated, it was applied to models
whose correspondence limit was [non-relativistic](/wiki/Theory\_of\_relativity
"Theory of relativity") classical mechanics. For instance, the well-known
model of the [quantum harmonic oscillator](/wiki/Quantum\_harmonic\_oscillator
"Quantum harmonic oscillator") uses an explicitly non-relativistic expression
for the [kinetic energy](/wiki/Kinetic\_energy "Kinetic energy") of the
oscillator, and is thus a quantum version of the [classical harmonic
oscillator](/wiki/Harmonic\_oscillator "Harmonic oscillator").[7]: 234

Complications arise with [chaotic systems](/wiki/Chaos\_theory "Chaos theory"),
which do not have good quantum numbers, and [quantum
chaos](/wiki/Quantum\_chaos "Quantum chaos") studies the relationship between
classical and quantum descriptions in these systems.[41]: 353

[Quantum decoherence](/wiki/Quantum\_decoherence "Quantum decoherence") is a
mechanism through which quantum systems lose
[coherence](/wiki/Quantum\_coherence "Quantum coherence"), and thus become
incapable of displaying many typically quantum effects: [quantum
superpositions](/wiki/Quantum\_superposition "Quantum superposition") become
simply probabilistic mixtures, and quantum entanglement becomes simply
classical correlations.[7]: 687–730 Quantum coherence is not typically evident
at macroscopic scales, though at temperatures approaching [absolute
zero](/wiki/Absolute\_zero "Absolute zero") quantum behavior may manifest
macroscopically.[note 3]

Many macroscopic properties of a classical system are a direct consequence of
the quantum behavior of its parts. For example, the stability of bulk matter
(consisting of atoms and [molecules](/wiki/Molecule "Molecule") which would
quickly collapse under electric forces alone), the rigidity of solids, and the
mechanical, thermal, chemical, optical and magnetic properties of matter are
all results of the interaction of [electric charges](/wiki/Electric\_charge
"Electric charge") under the rules of quantum mechanics.[43]
