### Overview[[edit](/w/index.php?title=String\_theory&action=edit&section=2
"Edit section: Overview")]

In the 20th century, two theoretical frameworks emerged for formulating the
laws of physics. The first is [Albert Einstein](/wiki/Albert\_Einstein "Albert
Einstein")'s [general theory of relativity](/wiki/General\_theory\_of\_relativity
"General theory of relativity"), a theory that explains the force of
[gravity](/wiki/Gravity "Gravity") and the structure of
[spacetime](/wiki/Spacetime "Spacetime") at the macro-level. The other is
[quantum mechanics](/wiki/Quantum\_mechanics "Quantum mechanics"), a completely
different formulation, which uses known [probability](/wiki/Probability
"Probability") principles to describe physical phenomena at the micro-level.
By the late 1970s, these two frameworks had proven to be sufficient to explain
most of the observed features of the [universe](/wiki/Universe "Universe"),
from [elementary particles](/wiki/Elementary\_particle "Elementary particle")
to [atoms](/wiki/Atom "Atom") to the evolution of stars and the universe as a
whole.[1]

In spite of these successes, there are still many problems that remain to be
solved. One of the deepest problems in modern physics is the problem of
[quantum gravity](/wiki/Quantum\_gravity "Quantum gravity").[1] The general
theory of relativity is formulated within the framework of [classical
physics](/wiki/Classical\_physics "Classical physics"), whereas the other
[fundamental forces](/wiki/Fundamental\_interaction "Fundamental interaction")
are described within the framework of quantum mechanics. A quantum theory of
gravity is needed in order to reconcile general relativity with the principles
of quantum mechanics, but difficulties arise when one attempts to apply the
usual prescriptions of quantum theory to the force of gravity.[2] In addition
to the problem of developing a consistent theory of quantum gravity, there are
many other fundamental problems in the physics of [atomic
nuclei](/wiki/Atomic\_nucleus "Atomic nucleus"), [black holes](/wiki/Black\_hole
"Black hole"), and the early universe.[a]

String theory is a [theoretical framework](/wiki/Mathematical\_theory
"Mathematical theory") that attempts to address these questions and many
others. The starting point for string theory is the idea that the [point-like
particles](/wiki/Point\_particle "Point particle") of [particle
physics](/wiki/Particle\_physics "Particle physics") can also be modeled as
one-dimensional objects called [strings](/wiki/String\_\(physics\) "String
\(physics\)"). String theory describes how strings propagate through space and
interact with each other. In a given version of string theory, there is only
one kind of string, which may look like a small loop or segment of ordinary
string, and it can [vibrate](/wiki/Vibration "Vibration") in different ways.
On distance scales larger than the string scale, a string will look just like
an ordinary particle consistent with non-string models of elementary
particles, with its [mass](/wiki/Mass "Mass"),
[charge](/wiki/Charge\_\(physics\) "Charge \(physics\)"), and other properties
determined by the vibrational state of the string. String theory's application
as a form of quantum gravity proposes a vibrational state responsible for the
[graviton](/wiki/Graviton "Graviton"), a yet unproven quantum particle that is
theorized to carry gravitational force.[3]

One of the main developments of the past several decades in string theory was
the discovery of certain 'dualities', mathematical transformations that
identify one physical theory with another. Physicists studying string theory
have discovered a number of these dualities between different versions of
string theory, and this has led to the conjecture that all consistent versions
of string theory are subsumed in a single framework known as
[M-theory](/wiki/M-theory "M-theory").[4]

Studies of string theory have also yielded a number of results on the nature
of black holes and the gravitational interaction. There are certain paradoxes
that arise when one attempts to understand the quantum aspects of black holes,
and work on string theory has attempted to clarify these issues. In late 1997
this line of work culminated in the discovery of the [anti-de Sitter/conformal
field theory correspondence](/wiki/Anti-
de\_Sitter/conformal\_field\_theory\_correspondence "Anti-de Sitter/conformal
field theory correspondence") or AdS/CFT.[5] This is a theoretical result that
relates string theory to other physical theories which are better understood
theoretically. The AdS/CFT correspondence has implications for the study of
black holes and quantum gravity, and it has been applied to other subjects,
including [nuclear](/wiki/Nuclear\_physics "Nuclear physics")[6] and [condensed
matter physics](/wiki/Condensed\_matter\_physics "Condensed matter
physics").[7][8]

Since string theory incorporates all of the fundamental interactions,
including gravity, many physicists hope that it will eventually be developed
to the point where it fully describes our universe, making it a [theory of
everything](/wiki/Theory\_of\_everything "Theory of everything"). One of the
goals of current research in string theory is to find a solution of the theory
that reproduces the observed spectrum of elementary particles, with a small
[cosmological constant](/wiki/Cosmological\_constant "Cosmological constant"),
containing [dark matter](/wiki/Dark\_matter "Dark matter") and a plausible
mechanism for [cosmic inflation](/wiki/Cosmic\_inflation "Cosmic inflation").
While there has been progress toward these goals, it is not known to what
extent string theory describes the real world or how much freedom the theory
allows in the choice of details.[9]

One of the challenges of string theory is that the full theory does not have a
satisfactory definition in all circumstances. The scattering of strings is
most straightforwardly defined using the techniques of [perturbation
theory](/wiki/Perturbation\_theory\_\(quantum\_mechanics\) "Perturbation theory
\(quantum mechanics\)"), but it is not known in general how to define string
theory [nonperturbatively](/wiki/Non-perturbative "Non-perturbative").[10] It
is also not clear whether there is any principle by which string theory
selects its [vacuum state](/wiki/Vacuum\_state "Vacuum state"), the physical
state that determines the properties of our universe.[11] These problems have
led some in the community to criticize these approaches to the unification of
physics and question the value of continued research on these problems.[12]
