## \_Blood
Meridian\_[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Judge\_Holden&action=edit&section=2 "Edit
section: Blood Meridian")]

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/9/99/Question\_book-
new.svg/50px-Question\_book-new.svg.png)](/wiki/File:Question\_book-new.svg)|
This section \*\*needs additional citations
for[verification](/wiki/Wikipedia:Verifiability "Wikipedia:Verifiability")\*\*.
Please help [improve this article](/wiki/Special:EditPage/Judge\_Holden
"Special:EditPage/Judge Holden") by [adding citations to reliable
sources](/wiki/Help:Referencing\_for\_beginners "Help:Referencing for
beginners") in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.
\_( May 2022)\_\_([Learn how and when to remove this
message](/wiki/Help:Maintenance\_template\_removal "Help:Maintenance template
removal"))\_ 
---|--- 
[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/7f/Cormac\_McCarthy\_%28Child\_of\_God\_author\_portrait\_-
\_high-res%29.jpg/170px-Cormac\_McCarthy\_%28Child\_of\_God\_author\_portrait\_-\_high-
res%29.jpg)](/wiki/File:Cormac\_McCarthy\_\(Child\_of\_God\_author\_portrait\_-\_high-
res\).jpg)Holden is heavily featured in [Cormac
McCarthy](/wiki/Cormac\_McCarthy "Cormac McCarthy")'s (pictured) \_[Blood
Meridian](/wiki/Blood\_Meridian "Blood Meridian")\_ (1985).

A fictionalized Holden is a central character in [Cormac
McCarthy](/wiki/Cormac\_McCarthy "Cormac McCarthy")'s 1985
[Western](/wiki/Western\_\(genre\) "Western \(genre\)") novel \_[Blood
Meridian](/wiki/Blood\_Meridian "Blood Meridian")\_. In the novel, he and
Glanton are the leaders of a pack of nomadic criminals who rob, rape, torture,
and kill across the borderlands between the United States and Mexico.
Throughout the novel, Holden brutally murders dozens of people, including
children. Searching for additional evidence for Holden's existence has been a
hobby for some Cormac McCarthy scholars.

As depicted in \_Blood Meridian\_ , Holden is a mysterious figure, a cold-
blooded killer, and, it is implied, a [pedophile](/wiki/Pedophile
"Pedophile");[8] aside from the children he openly kills, he is seen enticing
children with sweets, and a child often goes missing when he is in the
vicinity. At one point in the novel, he is seen naked with a naked 12-year-old
girl in his room. Holden displays knowledge of
[paleontology](/wiki/Paleontology "Paleontology"),
[archaeology](/wiki/Archaeology "Archaeology"),
[linguistics](/wiki/Linguistics "Linguistics"), [law](/wiki/Law "Law"),
[draftsmanship](/wiki/Technical\_drawing "Technical drawing"),
[geology](/wiki/Geology "Geology"), [chemistry](/wiki/Chemistry "Chemistry"),
[prestidigitation](/wiki/Sleight\_of\_hand "Sleight of hand"), and
[philosophy](/wiki/Philosophy "Philosophy").

He is described as nearly 7 ft 0 in (2.13 m) tall and [completely lacking body
hair](/wiki/Alopecia\_universalis "Alopecia universalis"), including eyebrows
and eyelashes. He is massive in frame, enormously strong, an excellent
musician and dancer, a fine [draftsman](/wiki/Drafter "Drafter"),
exceptionally articulate and persuasive in several languages, and an unerring
marksman. His skin is so pale as to have almost no [pigment](/wiki/Pigment
"Pigment"). This strange appearance, as well as his keen, extremely fast
reflexes, strength, agility, apparent immunity to sleep and aging, and
multifarious other abilities point to his being something other than a normal
human. In the final pages of the novel, McCarthy makes more direct reference
to the Judge as a [supernatural](/wiki/Supernatural "Supernatural") entity, or
even as a concept personified.

In 2002, [\_Book\_ magazine](/wiki/Book\_\(magazine\) "Book \(magazine\)") rated
Holden as the 43rd greatest character in fiction since 1900.[9] He is regarded
as one of the greatest characters of modern literature, likened to a "[Captain
Ahab](/wiki/Captain\_Ahab "Captain Ahab") of the desert."[10] [Harold
Bloom](/wiki/Harold\_Bloom "Harold Bloom") described him as "short of Moby
Dick, the most monstrous apparition in all of American literature."[11] Holden
has been characterized as "the most haunting character in American
literature."[12]
