### Early
results[[edit](/w/index.php?title=String\_theory&action=edit&section=25 "Edit
section: Early results")]

Some of the structures reintroduced by string theory arose for the first time
much earlier as part of the program of classical unification started by
[Albert Einstein](/wiki/Albert\_Einstein "Albert Einstein"). The first person
to add a [fifth dimension](/wiki/Five-dimensional\_space "Five-dimensional
space") to a theory of gravity was [Gunnar
Nordström](/wiki/Gunnar\_Nordstr%C3%B6m "Gunnar Nordström") in 1914, who noted
that gravity in five dimensions describes both gravity and electromagnetism in
four. Nordström attempted to unify electromagnetism with [his theory of
gravitation](/wiki/Nordstr%C3%B6m%27s\_theory\_of\_gravitation "Nordström's
theory of gravitation"), which was however superseded by Einstein's general
relativity in 1919. Thereafter, German mathematician [Theodor
Kaluza](/wiki/Theodor\_Kaluza "Theodor Kaluza") combined the fifth dimension
with [general relativity](/wiki/General\_relativity "General relativity"), and
only Kaluza is usually credited with the idea. In 1926, the Swedish physicist
[Oskar Klein](/wiki/Oskar\_Klein "Oskar Klein") gave [a physical
interpretation](/wiki/Kaluza%E2%80%93Klein\_theory "Kaluza–Klein theory") of
the unobservable extra dimension—it is wrapped into a small circle. Einstein
introduced a [non-symmetric](/wiki/Antisymmetric\_tensor "Antisymmetric
tensor") [metric tensor](/wiki/Metric\_tensor "Metric tensor"), while much
later Brans and Dicke added a scalar component to gravity. These ideas would
be revived within string theory, where they are demanded by consistency
conditions.

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f8/LeonardSusskindStanford2009\_cropped.jpg/170px-
LeonardSusskindStanford2009\_cropped.jpg)](/wiki/File:LeonardSusskindStanford2009\_cropped.jpg)[Leonard
Susskind](/wiki/Leonard\_Susskind "Leonard Susskind")

String theory was originally developed during the late 1960s and early 1970s
as a never completely successful theory of [hadrons](/wiki/Hadron "Hadron"),
the [subatomic particles](/wiki/Subatomic\_particle "Subatomic particle") like
the [proton](/wiki/Proton "Proton") and [neutron](/wiki/Neutron "Neutron")
that feel the [strong interaction](/wiki/Strong\_interaction "Strong
interaction"). In the 1960s, [Geoffrey Chew](/wiki/Geoffrey\_Chew "Geoffrey
Chew") and [Steven Frautschi](/wiki/Steven\_Frautschi "Steven Frautschi")
discovered that the [mesons](/wiki/Meson "Meson") make families called [Regge
trajectories](/wiki/Regge\_trajectories "Regge trajectories") with masses
related to spins in a way that was later understood by [Yoichiro
Nambu](/wiki/Yoichiro\_Nambu "Yoichiro Nambu"), [Holger Bech
Nielsen](/wiki/Holger\_Bech\_Nielsen "Holger Bech Nielsen") and [Leonard
Susskind](/wiki/Leonard\_Susskind "Leonard Susskind") to be the relationship
expected from rotating strings. Chew advocated making a theory for the
interactions of these trajectories that did not presume that they were
composed of any fundamental particles, but would construct their interactions
from [self-consistency conditions](/wiki/Bootstrap\_model "Bootstrap model") on
the [S-matrix](/wiki/S-matrix "S-matrix"). The [S-matrix
approach](/wiki/S-matrix\_theory "S-matrix theory") was started by [Werner
Heisenberg](/wiki/Werner\_Heisenberg "Werner Heisenberg") in the 1940s as a way
of constructing a theory that did not rely on the local notions of space and
time, which Heisenberg believed break down at the nuclear scale. While the
scale was off by many orders of magnitude, the approach he advocated was
ideally suited for a theory of quantum gravity.

Working with experimental data, R. Dolen, D. Horn and C. Schmid developed some
sum rules for hadron exchange. When a particle and
[antiparticle](/wiki/Antiparticle "Antiparticle") scatter, virtual particles
can be exchanged in two qualitatively different ways. In the s-channel, the
two particles annihilate to make temporary intermediate states that fall apart
into the final state particles. In the t-channel, the particles exchange
intermediate states by emission and absorption. In field theory, the two
contributions add together, one giving a continuous background contribution,
the other giving peaks at certain energies. In the data, it was clear that the
peaks were stealing from the background—the authors interpreted this as saying
that the t-channel contribution was dual to the s-channel one, meaning both
described the whole amplitude and included the other.

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/95/GabrieleVeneziano.jpg/170px-
GabrieleVeneziano.jpg)](/wiki/File:GabrieleVeneziano.jpg)[Gabriele
Veneziano](/wiki/Gabriele\_Veneziano "Gabriele Veneziano")

The result was widely advertised by [Murray Gell-Mann](/wiki/Murray\_Gell-Mann
"Murray Gell-Mann"), leading [Gabriele Veneziano](/wiki/Gabriele\_Veneziano
"Gabriele Veneziano") to construct a [scattering
amplitude](/wiki/Veneziano\_scattering\_amplitude "Veneziano scattering
amplitude") that had the property of Dolen–Horn–Schmid duality, later renamed
world-sheet duality. The amplitude needed poles where the particles appear, on
straight-line trajectories, and there is a special mathematical function whose
poles are evenly spaced on half the real line—the [gamma
function](/wiki/Gamma\_function "Gamma function")— which was widely used in
Regge theory. By manipulating combinations of gamma functions, Veneziano was
able to find a consistent scattering amplitude with poles on straight lines,
with mostly positive residues, which obeyed duality and had the appropriate
Regge scaling at high energy. The amplitude could fit near-beam scattering
data as well as other Regge type fits and had a suggestive integral
representation that could be used for generalization.

Over the next years, hundreds of physicists worked to complete the [bootstrap
program](/wiki/Bootstrap\_model "Bootstrap model") for this model, with many
surprises. Veneziano himself discovered that for the scattering amplitude to
describe the scattering of a particle that appears in the theory, an obvious
self-consistency condition, the lightest particle must be a
[tachyon](/wiki/Tachyon "Tachyon"). [Miguel
Virasoro](/wiki/Miguel\_%C3%81ngel\_Virasoro\_\(physicist\) "Miguel Ángel
Virasoro \(physicist\)") and Joel Shapiro found a different amplitude now
understood to be that of closed strings, while [Ziro
Koba](/w/index.php?title=Ziro\_Koba&action=edit&redlink=1 "Ziro Koba \(page
does not exist\)") and [Holger Nielsen](/wiki/Holger\_Bech\_Nielsen "Holger Bech
Nielsen") generalized Veneziano's integral representation to multiparticle
scattering. Veneziano and [Sergio Fubini](/wiki/Sergio\_Fubini "Sergio Fubini")
introduced an operator formalism for computing the scattering amplitudes that
was a forerunner of [world-sheet conformal theory](/w/index.php?title=World-
sheet\_conformal\_theory&action=edit&redlink=1 "World-sheet conformal theory
\(page does not exist\)"), while Virasoro understood how to remove the poles
with wrong-sign residues using a constraint on the states. [Claud
Lovelace](/wiki/Claud\_Lovelace "Claud Lovelace") calculated a loop amplitude,
and noted that there is an inconsistency unless the dimension of the theory is
26. [Charles Thorn](/wiki/Charles\_Thorn "Charles Thorn"), [Peter
Goddard](/wiki/Peter\_Goddard\_\(physicist\) "Peter Goddard \(physicist\)") and
[Richard Brower](/w/index.php?title=Richard\_Brower&action=edit&redlink=1
"Richard Brower \(page does not exist\)") went on to prove that there are no
wrong-sign propagating states in dimensions less than or equal to 26.

In 1969–70, [Yoichiro Nambu](/wiki/Yoichiro\_Nambu "Yoichiro Nambu"), [Holger
Bech Nielsen](/wiki/Holger\_Bech\_Nielsen "Holger Bech Nielsen"), and [Leonard
Susskind](/wiki/Leonard\_Susskind "Leonard Susskind") recognized that the
theory could be given a description in space and time in terms of strings. The
scattering amplitudes were derived systematically from the action principle by
[Peter Goddard](/wiki/Peter\_Goddard\_\(physicist\) "Peter Goddard
\(physicist\)"), [Jeffrey Goldstone](/wiki/Jeffrey\_Goldstone "Jeffrey
Goldstone"), [Claudio
Rebbi](/w/index.php?title=Claudio\_Rebbi&action=edit&redlink=1 "Claudio Rebbi
\(page does not exist\)"), and [Charles Thorn](/wiki/Charles\_Thorn "Charles
Thorn"), giving a space-time picture to the vertex operators introduced by
Veneziano and Fubini and a geometrical interpretation to the [Virasoro
conditions](/wiki/Virasoro\_algebra "Virasoro algebra").

In 1971, [Pierre Ramond](/wiki/Pierre\_Ramond "Pierre Ramond") added fermions
to the model, which led him to formulate a two-dimensional supersymmetry to
cancel the wrong-sign states. [John Schwarz](/wiki/John\_Henry\_Schwarz "John
Henry Schwarz") and [André Neveu](/wiki/Andr%C3%A9\_Neveu "André Neveu") added
another sector to the fermi theory a short time later. In the fermion
theories, the critical dimension was 10. [Stanley
Mandelstam](/wiki/Stanley\_Mandelstam "Stanley Mandelstam") formulated a world
sheet conformal theory for both the bose and fermi case, giving a two-
dimensional field theoretic path-integral to generate the operator formalism.
[Michio Kaku](/wiki/Michio\_Kaku "Michio Kaku") and [Keiji
Kikkawa](/wiki/Keiji\_Kikkawa "Keiji Kikkawa") gave a different formulation of
the bosonic string, as a [string field theory](/wiki/String\_field\_theory
"String field theory"), with infinitely many particle types and with fields
taking values not on points, but on loops and curves.

In 1974, [Tamiaki Yoneya](/wiki/Tamiaki\_Yoneya "Tamiaki Yoneya") discovered
that all the known string theories included a massless spin-two particle that
obeyed the correct [Ward identities](/wiki/Ward\_identities "Ward identities")
to be a graviton. John Schwarz and [Joël Scherk](/wiki/Jo%C3%ABl\_Scherk "Joël
Scherk") came to the same conclusion and made the bold leap to suggest that
string theory was a theory of gravity, not a theory of hadrons. They
reintroduced [Kaluza–Klein theory](/wiki/Kaluza%E2%80%93Klein\_theory
"Kaluza–Klein theory") as a way of making sense of the extra dimensions. At
the same time, [quantum chromodynamics](/wiki/Quantum\_chromodynamics "Quantum
chromodynamics") was recognized as the correct theory of hadrons, shifting the
attention of physicists and apparently leaving the bootstrap program in the
[dustbin of history](/wiki/Dustbin\_of\_history "Dustbin of history").

String theory eventually made it out of the dustbin, but for the following
decade, all work on the theory was completely ignored. Still, the theory
continued to develop at a steady pace thanks to the work of a handful of
devotees. [Ferdinando Gliozzi](/wiki/Ferdinando\_Gliozzi "Ferdinando Gliozzi"),
Joël Scherk, and [David Olive](/wiki/David\_Olive "David Olive") realized in
1977 that the original Ramond and Neveu Schwarz-strings were separately
inconsistent and needed to be combined. The resulting theory did not have a
tachyon and was proven to have space-time supersymmetry by John Schwarz and
[Michael Green](/wiki/Michael\_Green\_\(physicist\) "Michael Green
\(physicist\)") in 1984. The same year, [Alexander
Polyakov](/wiki/Alexander\_Markovich\_Polyakov "Alexander Markovich Polyakov")
gave the theory a modern path integral formulation, and went on to develop
conformal field theory extensively. In 1979, [Daniel
Friedan](/wiki/Daniel\_Friedan "Daniel Friedan") showed that the equations of
motions of string theory, which are generalizations of the [Einstein
equations](/wiki/Einstein\_equations "Einstein equations") of [general
relativity](/wiki/General\_relativity "General relativity"), emerge from the
[renormalization group](/wiki/Renormalization\_group "Renormalization group")
equations for the two-dimensional field theory. Schwarz and Green discovered
T-duality, and constructed two superstring theories—IIA and IIB related by
T-duality, and type I theories with open strings. The consistency conditions
had been so strong, that the entire theory was nearly uniquely determined,
with only a few discrete choices.
