### United
States[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Conspiracy\_theory&action=edit&section=34
"Edit section: United States")]

Main article: [Conspiracy theories in United States
politics](/wiki/Conspiracy\_theories\_in\_United\_States\_politics "Conspiracy
theories in United States politics")

The historian [Richard Hofstadter](/wiki/Richard\_Hofstadter "Richard
Hofstadter") addressed the role of [paranoia](/wiki/Paranoia "Paranoia") and
conspiracism throughout [U.S. history](/wiki/History\_of\_the\_United\_States
"History of the United States") in his 1964 essay "[The Paranoid Style in
American Politics](/wiki/The\_Paranoid\_Style\_in\_American\_Politics "The Paranoid
Style in American Politics")". [Bernard Bailyn](/wiki/Bernard\_Bailyn "Bernard
Bailyn")'s classic \_[The Ideological Origins of the American
Revolution](/wiki/The\_Ideological\_Origins\_of\_the\_American\_Revolution "The
Ideological Origins of the American Revolution")\_ (1967) notes that a similar
phenomenon could be found in North America during the time preceding the
[American Revolution](/wiki/American\_Revolution "American Revolution").
Conspiracism labels people's attitudes as well as the type of conspiracy
theories that are more global and historical in proportion.[175]

Harry G. West and others have noted that while conspiracy theorists may often
be dismissed as a fringe minority, certain evidence suggests that a wide range
of the U.S. maintains a belief in conspiracy theories. West also compares
those theories to [hypernationalism](/wiki/Hypernationalism
"Hypernationalism") and [religious
fundamentalism](/wiki/Religious\_fundamentalism "Religious
fundamentalism").[176][177]

Theologian Robert Jewett and philosopher [John Shelton
Lawrence](/wiki/John\_Shelton\_Lawrence "John Shelton Lawrence") attribute the
enduring popularity of conspiracy theories in the U.S. to the [Cold
War](/wiki/Cold\_War "Cold War"), [McCarthyism](/wiki/McCarthyism
"McCarthyism"), and [counterculture](/wiki/Counterculture\_of\_the\_1960s
"Counterculture of the 1960s") rejection of authority. They state that among
both the left-wing and right-wing, there remains a willingness to use real
events, such as Soviet plots, inconsistencies in the [Warren
Report](/wiki/Warren\_Commission "Warren Commission"), and the
[9/11](/wiki/September\_11\_attacks "September 11 attacks") attacks, to support
the existence of unverified and ongoing large-scale conspiracies.[178]

In his studies of "American political demonology", historian [Michael Paul
Rogin](/wiki/Michael\_Paul\_Rogin "Michael Paul Rogin") too analyzed this
paranoid style of politics that has occurred throughout American history.
Conspiracy theories frequently identify an imaginary subversive group that is
supposedly attacking the nation and requires the government and allied forces
to engage in harsh extra-legal repression of those threatening subversives.
Rogin cites examples from the Red Scares of 1919, to McCarthy's anti-communist
campaign in the 1950s and more recently fears of immigrant hordes invading the
US. Unlike Hofstadter, Rogin saw these "countersubversive" fears as frequently
coming from those in power and dominant groups, instead of from the
dispossessed. Unlike Robert Jewett, Rogin blamed not the counterculture, but
America's dominant culture of liberal individualism and the fears it
stimulated to explain the periodic eruption of irrational conspiracy
theories.[179]

The [Watergate scandal](/wiki/Watergate\_scandal "Watergate scandal") has also
been used to bestow legitimacy to other conspiracy theories, with [Richard
Nixon](/wiki/Richard\_Nixon "Richard Nixon") himself commenting that it served
as a "[Rorschach ink blot](/wiki/Rorschach\_test "Rorschach test")" which
invited others to fill in the underlying pattern.[86]

Historian Kathryn S. Olmsted cites three reasons why Americans are prone to
believing in government conspiracies theories:

 1. Genuine government overreach and secrecy during the Cold War, such as [Watergate](/wiki/Watergate "Watergate"), the [Tuskegee syphilis experiment](/wiki/Tuskegee\_syphilis\_experiment "Tuskegee syphilis experiment"), [Project MKUltra](/wiki/Project\_MKUltra "Project MKUltra"), and the CIA's [assassination attempts on Fidel Castro](/wiki/Assassination\_attempts\_on\_Fidel\_Castro "Assassination attempts on Fidel Castro") in collaboration with mobsters.
 2. Precedent set by official government-sanctioned conspiracy theories for propaganda, such as claims of German infiltration of the U.S. during World War II or the debunked claim that [Saddam Hussein played a role in the 9/11 attacks](/wiki/Saddam\_Hussein\_and\_al-Qaeda\_link\_allegations "Saddam Hussein and al-Qaeda link allegations").
 3. Distrust fostered by the government's spying on and harassment of dissenters, such as the [Sedition Act of 1918](/wiki/Sedition\_Act\_of\_1918 "Sedition Act of 1918"), [COINTELPRO](/wiki/COINTELPRO "COINTELPRO"), and as part of various [Red Scares](/wiki/Red\_Scare "Red Scare").[180]

[Alex Jones](/wiki/Alex\_Jones "Alex Jones") referenced numerous conspiracy
theories for convincing his supporters to endorse [Ron Paul](/wiki/Ron\_Paul
"Ron Paul") over [Mitt Romney](/wiki/Mitt\_Romney "Mitt Romney") in the [2012
Republican Party presidential
primaries](/wiki/2012\_Republican\_Party\_presidential\_primaries "2012 Republican
Party presidential primaries") and [Donald Trump](/wiki/Donald\_Trump "Donald
Trump") over [Hillary Clinton](/wiki/Hillary\_Clinton "Hillary Clinton") in the
[2016 United States presidential
election](/wiki/2016\_United\_States\_presidential\_election "2016 United States
presidential election").[181][182] Into the 2020s, the [QAnon conspiracy
theory](/wiki/QAnon\_conspiracy\_theory "QAnon conspiracy theory") alleges that
Trump is fighting against a [deep-state](/wiki/Deep\_state\_in\_the\_United\_States
"Deep state in the United States") [cabal](/wiki/Cabal "Cabal") of child sex-
abusing and Satan-worshipping
[Democrats](/wiki/Democratic\_Party\_\(United\_States\) "Democratic Party
\(United States\)").[35][36][183][184][185][186]
