### Prerequisites[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Physics&action=edit&section=14
"Edit section: Prerequisites")]

Mathematics provides a compact and exact language used to describe the order
in nature. This was noted and advocated by [Pythagoras](/wiki/Pythagoras
"Pythagoras"),[54] [Plato](/wiki/Plato "Plato"),[55] Galileo,[56] and Newton.
Some theorists, like [Hilary Putnam](/wiki/Hilary\_Putnam "Hilary Putnam") and
[Penelope Maddy](/wiki/Penelope\_Maddy "Penelope Maddy"), hold that logical
truths, and therefore mathematical reasoning, depend on the
[empirical](/wiki/Empirical "Empirical") world. This is usually combined with
the claim that the laws of logic express universal regularities found in the
structural features of the world, which may explain the peculiar relation
between these fields.

Physics uses mathematics[57] to organise and formulate experimental results.
From those results, [precise](/wiki/Analytic\_solution "Analytic solution") or
[estimated](/wiki/Simulation#Computer\_simulation "Simulation") solutions are
obtained, or quantitative results, from which new predictions can be made and
experimentally confirmed or negated. The results from physics experiments are
numerical data, with their [units of measure](/wiki/Units\_of\_measure "Units of
measure") and estimates of the errors in the measurements. Technologies based
on mathematics, like [computation](/wiki/Scientific\_computing "Scientific
computing") have made [computational physics](/wiki/Computational\_physics
"Computational physics") an active area of research.

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d8/Mathematical\_Physics\_and\_other\_sciences.png/220px-
Mathematical\_Physics\_and\_other\_sciences.png)](/wiki/File:Mathematical\_Physics\_and\_other\_sciences.png)The
distinction between mathematics and physics is clear-cut, but not always
obvious, especially in mathematical physics.

[Ontology](/wiki/Ontology "Ontology") is a prerequisite for physics, but not
for mathematics. It means physics is ultimately concerned with descriptions of
the real world, while mathematics is concerned with abstract patterns, even
beyond the real world. Thus physics statements are synthetic, while
mathematical statements are analytic. Mathematics contains hypotheses, while
physics contains theories. Mathematics statements have to be only logically
true, while predictions of physics statements must match observed and
experimental data.

The distinction is clear-cut, but not always obvious. For example,
[mathematical physics](/wiki/Mathematical\_physics "Mathematical physics") is
the application of mathematics in physics. Its methods are mathematical, but
its subject is physical.[58] The problems in this field start with a
"[mathematical model of a physical situation](/wiki/Boundary\_condition
"Boundary condition")" (system) and a "mathematical description of a physical
law" that will be applied to that system. Every mathematical statement used
for solving has a hard-to-find physical meaning. The final mathematical
solution has an easier-to-find meaning, because it is what the solver is
looking for.[\_[clarification needed](/wiki/Wikipedia:Please\_clarify
"Wikipedia:Please clarify")\_]

Pure physics is a branch of [fundamental science](/wiki/Fundamental\_science
"Fundamental science") (also called basic science). Physics is also called
"\_the\_ fundamental science" because all branches of natural science like
chemistry, astronomy, geology, and biology are constrained by laws of
physics.[59] Similarly, chemistry is often called [the central
science](/wiki/The\_central\_science "The central science") because of its role
in linking the physical sciences. For example, chemistry studies properties,
structures, and [reactions](/wiki/Chemical\_reaction "Chemical reaction") of
matter (chemistry's focus on the molecular and atomic scale [distinguishes it
from physics](/wiki/Difference\_between\_chemistry\_and\_physics "Difference
between chemistry and physics")). Structures are formed because particles
exert electrical forces on each other, properties include physical
characteristics of given substances, and reactions are bound by laws of
physics, like [conservation of energy](/wiki/Conservation\_of\_energy
"Conservation of energy"), [mass](/wiki/Conservation\_of\_mass "Conservation of
mass"), and [charge](/wiki/Charge\_conservation "Charge conservation"). Physics
is applied in industries like engineering and medicine.
