## Philosophical
implications[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Quantum\_mechanics&action=edit&section=18
"Edit section: Philosophical implications")]

Main article: [Interpretations of quantum
mechanics](/wiki/Interpretations\_of\_quantum\_mechanics "Interpretations of
quantum mechanics")

Unsolved problem in physics:

Is there a preferred interpretation of quantum mechanics? How does the quantum
description of reality, which includes elements such as the
"[superposition](/wiki/Superposition\_principle "Superposition principle") of
states" and "[wave function collapse](/wiki/Wave\_function\_collapse "Wave
function collapse")", give rise to the reality we perceive?

[(more unsolved problems in
physics)](/wiki/List\_of\_unsolved\_problems\_in\_physics "List of unsolved
problems in physics")

Since its inception, the many counter-intuitive aspects and results of quantum
mechanics have provoked strong [philosophical](/wiki/Philosophy "Philosophy")
debates and many [interpretations](/wiki/Interpretations\_of\_quantum\_mechanics
"Interpretations of quantum mechanics"). The arguments centre on the
probabilistic nature of quantum mechanics, the difficulties with [wavefunction
collapse](/wiki/Wavefunction\_collapse "Wavefunction collapse") and the related
[measurement problem](/wiki/Measurement\_problem "Measurement problem"), and
[quantum nonlocality](/wiki/Quantum\_nonlocality "Quantum nonlocality").
Perhaps the only consensus that exists about these issues is that there is no
consensus. [Richard Feynman](/wiki/Richard\_Feynman "Richard Feynman") once
said, "I think I can safely say that nobody understands quantum
mechanics."[51] According to [Steven Weinberg](/wiki/Steven\_Weinberg "Steven
Weinberg"), "There is now in my opinion no entirely satisfactory
interpretation of quantum mechanics."[52]

The views of [Niels Bohr](/wiki/Niels\_Bohr "Niels Bohr"), Werner Heisenberg
and other physicists are often grouped together as the "[Copenhagen
interpretation](/wiki/Copenhagen\_interpretation "Copenhagen
interpretation")".[53][54] According to these views, the probabilistic nature
of quantum mechanics is not a \_temporary\_ feature which will eventually be
replaced by a deterministic theory, but is instead a \_final\_ renunciation of
the classical idea of "causality". Bohr in particular emphasized that any
well-defined application of the quantum mechanical formalism must always make
reference to the experimental arrangement, due to the
[complementary](/wiki/Complementarity\_\(physics\) "Complementarity
\(physics\)") nature of evidence obtained under different experimental
situations. Copenhagen-type interpretations were adopted by Nobel laureates in
quantum physics, including Bohr,[55] Heisenberg,[56] Schrödinger,[57]
Feynman,[2] and Zeilinger[58] as well as 21st-century researchers in quantum
foundations.[59]

[Albert Einstein](/wiki/Albert\_Einstein "Albert Einstein"), himself one of the
founders of [quantum theory](/wiki/Old\_quantum\_theory "Old quantum theory"),
was troubled by its apparent failure to respect some cherished metaphysical
principles, such as [determinism](/wiki/Determinism "Determinism") and
[locality](/wiki/Principle\_of\_locality "Principle of locality"). Einstein's
long-running exchanges with Bohr about the meaning and status of quantum
mechanics are now known as the [Bohr–Einstein
debates](/wiki/Bohr%E2%80%93Einstein\_debates "Bohr–Einstein debates").
Einstein believed that underlying quantum mechanics must be a theory that
explicitly forbids [action at a distance](/wiki/Action\_at\_a\_distance "Action
at a distance"). He argued that quantum mechanics was incomplete, a theory
that was valid but not fundamental, analogous to how
[thermodynamics](/wiki/Thermodynamics "Thermodynamics") is valid, but the
fundamental theory behind it is [statistical
mechanics](/wiki/Statistical\_mechanics "Statistical mechanics"). In 1935,
Einstein and his collaborators [Boris Podolsky](/wiki/Boris\_Podolsky "Boris
Podolsky") and [Nathan Rosen](/wiki/Nathan\_Rosen "Nathan Rosen") published an
argument that the principle of locality implies the incompleteness of quantum
mechanics, a [thought experiment](/wiki/Thought\_experiment "Thought
experiment") later termed the [Einstein–Podolsky–Rosen
paradox](/wiki/Einstein%E2%80%93Podolsky%E2%80%93Rosen\_paradox
"Einstein–Podolsky–Rosen paradox").[note 4] In 1964, [John
Bell](/wiki/John\_Stewart\_Bell "John Stewart Bell") showed that EPR's principle
of locality, together with determinism, was actually incompatible with quantum
mechanics: they implied constraints on the correlations produced by distance
systems, now known as [Bell inequalities](/wiki/Bell\_inequalities "Bell
inequalities"), that can be violated by entangled particles.[64] Since then
[several experiments](/wiki/Bell\_test "Bell test") have been performed to
obtain these correlations, with the result that they do in fact violate Bell
inequalities, and thus falsify the conjunction of locality with
determinism.[16][17]

[Bohmian mechanics](/wiki/Bohmian\_mechanics "Bohmian mechanics") shows that it
is possible to reformulate quantum mechanics to make it deterministic, at the
price of making it explicitly nonlocal. It attributes not only a wave function
to a physical system, but in addition a real position, that evolves
deterministically under a nonlocal guiding equation. The evolution of a
physical system is given at all times by the Schrödinger equation together
with the guiding equation; there is never a collapse of the wave function.
This solves the measurement problem.[65]

Everett's [many-worlds interpretation](/wiki/Many-worlds\_interpretation "Many-
worlds interpretation"), formulated in 1956, holds that \_all\_ the
possibilities described by quantum theory \_simultaneously\_ occur in a
multiverse composed of mostly independent parallel universes.[66] This is a
consequence of removing the axiom of the collapse of the wave packet. All
possible states of the measured system and the measuring apparatus, together
with the observer, are present in a real physical quantum superposition. While
the multiverse is deterministic, we perceive non-deterministic behavior
governed by probabilities, because we do not observe the multiverse as a
whole, but only one parallel universe at a time. Exactly how this is supposed
to work has been the subject of much debate. Several attempts have been made
to make sense of this and derive the Born rule,[67][68] with no consensus on
whether they have been successful.[69][70][71]

[Relational quantum mechanics](/wiki/Relational\_quantum\_mechanics "Relational
quantum mechanics") appeared in the late 1990s as a modern derivative of
Copenhagen-type ideas,[72] and [QBism](/wiki/QBism "QBism") was developed some
years later.[73]
