### Modern[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Physics&action=edit&section=6 "Edit
section: Modern")]

Main article: [Modern physics](/wiki/Modern\_physics "Modern physics")

See also: [History of special relativity](/wiki/History\_of\_special\_relativity
"History of special relativity") and [History of quantum
mechanics](/wiki/History\_of\_quantum\_mechanics "History of quantum mechanics")

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/91/Max\_Planck\_Nobel\_1918.jpg/170px-
Max\_Planck\_Nobel\_1918.jpg)](/wiki/File:Max\_Planck\_Nobel\_1918.jpg)[Max
Planck](/wiki/Max\_Planck "Max Planck") (1858–1947), the originator of the
theory of [quantum mechanics](/wiki/Quantum\_mechanics "Quantum mechanics")
[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/af/Einstein1921\_by\_F\_Schmutzer\_2.jpg/170px-
Einstein1921\_by\_F\_Schmutzer\_2.jpg)](/wiki/File:Einstein1921\_by\_F\_Schmutzer\_2.jpg)[Albert
Einstein](/wiki/Albert\_Einstein "Albert Einstein") (1879–1955), discovered the
[photoelectric effect](/wiki/Photoelectric\_effect "Photoelectric effect") and
[theory of relativity](/wiki/Theory\_of\_relativity "Theory of relativity").

[Modern physics](/wiki/Modern\_physics "Modern physics") began in the early
20th century with the work of [Max Planck](/wiki/Max\_Planck "Max Planck") in
quantum theory and [Albert Einstein](/wiki/Albert\_Einstein "Albert
Einstein")'s theory of relativity. Both of these theories came about due to
inaccuracies in classical mechanics in certain situations. [Classical
mechanics](/wiki/Classical\_mechanics "Classical mechanics") predicted that the
[speed of light](/wiki/Speed\_of\_light "Speed of light") depends on the motion
of the observer, which could not be resolved with the constant speed predicted
by [Maxwell's equations](/wiki/Maxwell%27s\_equations "Maxwell's equations") of
electromagnetism. This discrepancy was corrected by Einstein's theory of
[special relativity](/wiki/Special\_relativity "Special relativity"), which
replaced classical mechanics for fast-moving bodies and allowed for a constant
speed of light.[34] [Black-body radiation](/wiki/Black-body\_radiation "Black-
body radiation") provided another problem for classical physics, which was
corrected when Planck proposed that the excitation of material oscillators is
possible only in discrete steps proportional to their frequency. This, along
with the [photoelectric effect](/wiki/Photoelectric\_effect "Photoelectric
effect") and a complete theory predicting discrete [energy
levels](/wiki/Energy\_levels "Energy levels") of [electron
orbitals](/wiki/Atomic\_orbital "Atomic orbital"), led to the theory of quantum
mechanics improving on classical physics at very small scales.[35]

Quantum mechanics would come to be pioneered by [Werner
Heisenberg](/wiki/Werner\_Heisenberg "Werner Heisenberg"), [Erwin
Schrödinger](/wiki/Erwin\_Schr%C3%B6dinger "Erwin Schrödinger") and [Paul
Dirac](/wiki/Paul\_Dirac "Paul Dirac").[35] From this early work, and work in
related fields, the [Standard Model of particle
physics](/wiki/Standard\_Model\_of\_particle\_physics "Standard Model of particle
physics") was derived.[36] Following the discovery of a particle with
properties consistent with the [Higgs boson](/wiki/Higgs\_boson "Higgs boson")
at [CERN](/wiki/CERN "CERN") in 2012,[37] all [fundamental
particles](/wiki/Fundamental\_particles "Fundamental particles") predicted by
the standard model, and no others, appear to exist; however, [physics beyond
the Standard Model](/wiki/Physics\_beyond\_the\_Standard\_Model "Physics beyond
the Standard Model"), with theories such as
[supersymmetry](/wiki/Supersymmetry "Supersymmetry"), is an active area of
research.[38] Areas of mathematics in general are important to this field,
such as the study of [probabilities](/wiki/Probability\_amplitude "Probability
amplitude") and [groups](/wiki/Group\_theory#Physics "Group theory").
