### Combinatorial
games[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Game\_theory&action=edit&section=13 "Edit
section: Combinatorial games")]

Games in which the difficulty of finding an optimal strategy stems from the
multiplicity of possible moves are called combinatorial games. Examples
include chess and [Go](/wiki/Go\_\(game\) "Go \(game\)"). Games that involve
[imperfect information](/wiki/Perfect\_information "Perfect information") may
also have a strong combinatorial character, for instance
[backgammon](/wiki/Backgammon "Backgammon"). There is no unified theory
addressing combinatorial elements in games. There are, however, mathematical
tools that can solve some particular problems and answer some general
questions.[33]

Games of perfect information have been studied in [combinatorial game
theory](/wiki/Combinatorial\_game\_theory "Combinatorial game theory"), which
has developed novel representations, e.g. [surreal
numbers](/wiki/Surreal\_numbers "Surreal numbers"), as well as
[combinatorial](/wiki/Combinatorics "Combinatorics") and
[algebraic](/wiki/Abstract\_algebra "Abstract algebra") (and [sometimes non-
constructive](/wiki/Strategy\_stealing\_argument "Strategy stealing argument"))
proof methods to [solve games](/wiki/Solved\_game "Solved game") of certain
types, including "loopy" games that may result in infinitely long sequences of
moves. These methods address games with higher combinatorial complexity than
those usually considered in traditional (or "economic") game theory.[34][35] A
typical game that has been solved this way is [Hex](/wiki/Hex\_\(board\_game\)
"Hex \(board game\)"). A related field of study, drawing from [computational
complexity theory](/wiki/Computational\_complexity\_theory "Computational
complexity theory"), is [game complexity](/wiki/Game\_complexity "Game
complexity"), which is concerned with estimating the computational difficulty
of finding optimal strategies.[36]

Research in [artificial intelligence](/wiki/Artificial\_intelligence
"Artificial intelligence") has addressed both perfect and imperfect
information games that have very complex combinatorial structures (like chess,
go, or backgammon) for which no provable optimal strategies have been found.
The practical solutions involve computational heuristics, like [alpha–beta
pruning](/wiki/Alpha%E2%80%93beta\_pruning "Alpha–beta pruning") or use of
[artificial neural networks](/wiki/Artificial\_neural\_network "Artificial
neural network") trained by [reinforcement
learning](/wiki/Reinforcement\_learning "Reinforcement learning"), which make
games more tractable in computing practice.[33][37]
