Two interrelated physics theories by Albert Einstein

This article is about the scientific concept. For philosophical or ontological
theories about relativity, see [Relativism](/wiki/Relativism "Relativism").
For the silent film, see [The Einstein Theory of
Relativity](/wiki/The\_Einstein\_Theory\_of\_Relativity "The Einstein Theory of
Relativity").

Video simulation of the merger [GW150914](/wiki/GW150914 "GW150914"), showing
[spacetime](/wiki/Spacetime "Spacetime") distortion from gravity as the black
holes orbit and merge

The \*\*theory of relativity\*\* usually encompasses two interrelated
[physics](/wiki/Physics "Physics") theories by [Albert
Einstein](/wiki/Albert\_Einstein "Albert Einstein"): [special
relativity](/wiki/Special\_relativity "Special relativity") and [general
relativity](/wiki/General\_relativity "General relativity"), proposed and
published in 1905 and 1915, respectively.[1] Special relativity applies to all
physical phenomena in the absence of [gravity](/wiki/Gravity "Gravity").
General relativity explains the law of gravitation and its relation to the
forces of nature.[2] It applies to the [cosmological](/wiki/Cosmological
"Cosmological") and astrophysical realm, including astronomy.[3]

The theory transformed [theoretical physics](/wiki/Theoretical\_physics
"Theoretical physics") and [astronomy](/wiki/Astronomy "Astronomy") during the
20th century, superseding a 200-year-old [theory of
mechanics](/wiki/Classical\_mechanics "Classical mechanics") created primarily
by [Isaac Newton](/wiki/Isaac\_Newton "Isaac Newton").[3][4][5] It introduced
concepts including 4-[dimensional](/wiki/Dimension "Dimension")
[spacetime](/wiki/Spacetime "Spacetime") as a unified entity of
[space](/wiki/Space "Space") and [time](/wiki/Time\_in\_physics "Time in
physics"), [relativity of simultaneity](/wiki/Relativity\_of\_simultaneity
"Relativity of simultaneity"), [kinematic](/wiki/Kinematics "Kinematics") and
[gravitational](/wiki/Gravity "Gravity") [time dilation](/wiki/Time\_dilation
"Time dilation"), and [length contraction](/wiki/Length\_contraction "Length
contraction"). In the field of physics, relativity improved the science of
[elementary particles](/wiki/Elementary\_particles "Elementary particles") and
their fundamental interactions, along with ushering in the [nuclear
age](/wiki/Atomic\_age "Atomic age"). With relativity,
[cosmology](/wiki/Physical\_cosmology "Physical cosmology") and
[astrophysics](/wiki/Astrophysics "Astrophysics") predicted extraordinary
[astronomical phenomena](/wiki/Astronomy "Astronomy") such as [neutron
stars](/wiki/Neutron\_stars "Neutron stars"), [black holes](/wiki/Black\_holes
"Black holes"), and [gravitational waves](/wiki/Gravitational\_waves
"Gravitational waves").[3][4][5]
