#### Predatory behaviour and hunting
techniques[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Cassowary&action=edit&section=6 "Edit
section: Predatory behaviour and hunting techniques")]

Despite their largely frugivorous lifestyle, some consider cassowaries as an
[apex species](/wiki/Apex\_predator "Apex predator") due to the lack of any
large predators in either Australia or New Guinea; forcing the birds to
necessitate the role in controlling the population of small prey animals
including other small [mesopredators](/wiki/Mesopredators "Mesopredators")
such as snakes and lizards.[47][48][49][50] This would technically make the
cassowary the largest bird with minor predatory behaviour since, if fruit
forms 90% of their diet or 5 kg per day in the wild, than the remaining 10% or
500 grams would largely consist of prey material for protein
supplementation[51]. Indeed, in times of food shortage, storm disruptions or
changing seasons which result in lower fruit yield (i.e. [winter](/wiki/Winter
"Winter") and [autumn](/wiki/Autumn "Autumn")), the birds turn from [primary
consumer](/wiki/Primary\_consumer "Primary consumer") to generalist
opportunistic predators, as frequent fecal examinations revealed the skeletal
remains of entire birds, rodents and fish scales on a constant basis[29].

New surveys and observations in 2019 has also shown that cassowaries are one
of the few ratites - the other being the equally elusive
[kiwi](/wiki/Kiwi\_\(bird\) "Kiwi \(bird\)") \- with a recorded predator-prey
hunting behaviour. According to ecologists, Wren McLean, when hunting for
fish, cassowaries are known to lower themselves in a freshwater pool and open
up their feathers.[45] They allow small fish to come and eat their dead skin
cells. Once the fish has been baited, they close their feathers, step out of
the water, shake themselves and then consume their prey.[45] Outside of fish,
the remains of crustaceans such as crabs are also found in their feces,
suggesting that the birds also actively hunt these animals as well on
occasion.[45]

Likewise, reports of cassowaries hunting and killing small mammals and lizards
are quite common, with the birds often using their feet to dig and scour the
forest floor for a meal - whether it is prey or fruit - before snatching it up
with their beaks and swallowing them whole.[52][53] As far as larger animals
go, such as road kill, cassowary beaks - whilst sharp[30] \- aren't serrated
like those of a true [predatory bird](/wiki/Predatory\_birds "Predatory
birds"), so they can't properly butcher their prey. As such, they compensate
by using their feet as an anchor before grabbing a morsel and tearing it off
with their neck muscles [54][55]. Their cravings for a high protein diet are
such[53], that adult roosters with chicks are known to supply their young with
a surprisingly high protein diet such as insects, suggesting that protein
forms a important dietary supplement for young cassowaries.[52] In captivity,
outside of available hand-fed processed protein source, captive cassowaries
are known to [predate](/wiki/Predation "Predation") on either live or dead
[mice](/wiki/Mice "Mice"), as well as actively hunt for small birds and their
eggs that flew into their enclosure.[56]
