### Albert Einstein's theory of
relativity[[edit](/w/index.php?title=History\_of\_physics&action=edit&section=25
"Edit section: Albert Einstein's theory of relativity")]

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/a0/Einstein\_patentoffice.jpg/220px-
Einstein\_patentoffice.jpg)](/wiki/File:Einstein\_patentoffice.jpg)[Albert
Einstein](/wiki/Albert\_Einstein "Albert Einstein") (1879–1955), photographed
here in around 1905

In 1905, a 26-year-old German physicist named [Albert
Einstein](/wiki/Albert\_Einstein "Albert Einstein") (then a [patent
clerk](/wiki/Patent\_clerk "Patent clerk") in [Bern](/wiki/Bern "Bern"),
Switzerland) showed how measurements of time and space are affected by motion
between an observer and what is being observed. Einstein's radical [theory of
relativity](/wiki/Theory\_of\_relativity "Theory of relativity") revolutionized
science. Although Einstein made many other important contributions to science,
the theory of relativity alone represents one of the greatest intellectual
achievements of all time. Although the concept of relativity was not
introduced by Einstein, he recognised that the [speed of
light](/wiki/Speed\_of\_light "Speed of light") in vacuum is constant, i.e., the
same for all observers, and an absolute upper limit to speed. This does not
impact a person's day-to-day life since most objects travel at speeds much
slower than light speed. For objects travelling near light speed, however, the
theory of relativity shows that clocks associated with those objects will run
more slowly and that the objects shorten in length according to measurements
of an observer on Earth. Einstein also derived the equation, \_E\_ = \_mc\_ 2,
which expresses the [equivalence of mass and
energy](/wiki/Mass%E2%80%93energy\_equivalence "Mass–energy equivalence").
