### Classical[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Physics&action=edit&section=9 "Edit
section: Classical")]

Main article: [Classical physics](/wiki/Classical\_physics "Classical physics")

Classical physics includes the traditional branches and topics that were
recognized and well-developed before the beginning of the 20th
centuryâ€”classical mechanics, [acoustics](/wiki/Acoustics "Acoustics"),
[optics](/wiki/Optics "Optics"), thermodynamics, and electromagnetism.
Classical mechanics is concerned with bodies acted on by [forces](/wiki/Force
"Force") and bodies in [motion](/wiki/Motion\_\(physics\) "Motion \(physics\)")
and may be divided into [statics](/wiki/Statics "Statics") (study of the
forces on a body or bodies not subject to an acceleration),
[kinematics](/wiki/Kinematics "Kinematics") (study of motion without regard to
its causes), and [dynamics](/wiki/Analytical\_dynamics "Analytical dynamics")
(study of motion and the forces that affect it); mechanics may also be divided
into [solid mechanics](/wiki/Solid\_mechanics "Solid mechanics") and [fluid
mechanics](/wiki/Fluid\_mechanics "Fluid mechanics") (known together as
[continuum mechanics](/wiki/Continuum\_mechanics "Continuum mechanics")), the
latter include such branches as [hydrostatics](/wiki/Hydrostatics
"Hydrostatics"), [hydrodynamics](/wiki/Fluid\_dynamics "Fluid dynamics"),
[aerodynamics](/wiki/Aerodynamics "Aerodynamics"), and
[pneumatics](/wiki/Pneumatics "Pneumatics"). Acoustics is the study of how
sound is produced, controlled, transmitted and received.[49] Important modern
branches of acoustics include [ultrasonics](/wiki/Ultrasonics "Ultrasonics"),
the study of sound waves of very high frequency beyond the range of human
hearing; [bioacoustics](/wiki/Bioacoustics "Bioacoustics"), the physics of
animal calls and hearing,[50] and [electroacoustics](/wiki/Electroacoustics
"Electroacoustics"), the manipulation of audible sound waves using
electronics.[51]

Optics, the study of light, is concerned not only with [visible
light](/wiki/Visible\_light "Visible light") but also with
[infrared](/wiki/Infrared "Infrared") and [ultraviolet
radiation](/wiki/Ultraviolet\_radiation "Ultraviolet radiation"), which exhibit
all of the phenomena of visible light except visibility, e.g., reflection,
refraction, interference, diffraction, dispersion, and polarization of light.
Heat is a form of energy, the internal energy possessed by the particles of
which a substance is composed; thermodynamics deals with the relationships
between heat and other forms of energy. Electricity and
[magnetism](/wiki/Magnetism "Magnetism") have been studied as a single branch
of physics since the intimate connection between them was discovered in the
early 19th century; an [electric current](/wiki/Electric\_current "Electric
current") gives rise to a [magnetic field](/wiki/Magnetic\_field "Magnetic
field"), and a changing magnetic field induces an electric current.
[Electrostatics](/wiki/Electrostatics "Electrostatics") deals with [electric
charges](/wiki/Electric\_charge "Electric charge") at rest,
[electrodynamics](/wiki/Classical\_electromagnetism "Classical
electromagnetism") with moving charges, and
[magnetostatics](/wiki/Magnetostatics "Magnetostatics") with magnetic poles at
rest.
