### Statistical mechanics (a fundamentally new approach to
science)[[edit](/w/index.php?title=History\_of\_physics&action=edit&section=21
"Edit section: Statistical mechanics \(a fundamentally new approach to
science\)")]

Further information: [History of statistical
mechanics](/wiki/History\_of\_statistical\_mechanics "History of statistical
mechanics")

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/57/James\_Clerk\_Maxwell.png/180px-
James\_Clerk\_Maxwell.png)](/wiki/File:James\_Clerk\_Maxwell.png)[James Clerk
Maxwell](/wiki/James\_Clerk\_Maxwell "James Clerk Maxwell") 
(1831–1879)

In 1859, [James Clerk Maxwell](/wiki/James\_Clerk\_Maxwell "James Clerk
Maxwell") discovered the [distribution law of molecular
velocities](/wiki/Maxwell%E2%80%93Boltzmann\_distribution "Maxwell–Boltzmann
distribution"). Maxwell showed that electric and magnetic fields are
propagated outward from their source at a speed equal to that of light and
that light is one of several kinds of electromagnetic radiation, differing
only in frequency and wavelength from the others. In 1859, Maxwell worked out
the mathematics of the distribution of velocities of the molecules of a gas.
The wave theory of light was widely accepted by the time of Maxwell's work on
the electromagnetic field, and afterward the study of light and that of
electricity and magnetism were closely related. In 1864 James Maxwell
published his papers on a dynamical theory of the electromagnetic field, and
stated that light is an electromagnetic phenomenon in the 1873 publication of
Maxwell's \_[Treatise on Electricity and
Magnetism](/wiki/A\_Treatise\_on\_Electricity\_and\_Magnetism "A Treatise on
Electricity and Magnetism")\_. This work drew upon theoretical work by German
theoreticians such as [Carl Friedrich Gauss](/wiki/Carl\_Friedrich\_Gauss "Carl
Friedrich Gauss") and [Wilhelm Weber](/wiki/Wilhelm\_Eduard\_Weber "Wilhelm
Eduard Weber"). The encapsulation of heat in particulate motion, and the
addition of electromagnetic forces to Newtonian dynamics established an
enormously robust theoretical underpinning to physical observations.

The prediction that light represented a transmission of energy in wave form
through a "[luminiferous ether](/wiki/Luminiferous\_aether "Luminiferous
aether")", and the seeming confirmation of that prediction with Helmholtz
student [Heinrich Hertz](/wiki/Heinrich\_Hertz "Heinrich Hertz")'s 1888
detection of [electromagnetic radiation](/wiki/Electromagnetic\_radiation
"Electromagnetic radiation"), was a major triumph for physical theory and
raised the possibility that even more fundamental theories based on the field
could soon be developed.[58][59][60][61] Experimental confirmation of
Maxwell's theory was provided by Hertz, who generated and detected electric
waves in 1886 and verified their properties, at the same time foreshadowing
their application in radio, television, and other devices. In 1887, Heinrich
Hertz discovered the [photoelectric effect](/wiki/Photoelectric\_effect
"Photoelectric effect"). Research on the electromagnetic waves began soon
after, with many scientists and inventors conducting experiments on their
properties. In the mid to late 1890s [Guglielmo
Marconi](/wiki/Guglielmo\_Marconi "Guglielmo Marconi") developed a [radio
wave](/wiki/Radio\_wave "Radio wave") based [wireless
telegraphy](/wiki/Wireless\_telegraphy "Wireless telegraphy") system [62] (see
[invention of radio](/wiki/Invention\_of\_radio "Invention of radio")).

The atomic theory of matter had been proposed again in the early 19th century
by the chemist [John Dalton](/wiki/John\_Dalton "John Dalton") and became one
of the hypotheses of the kinetic-molecular theory of gases developed by
Clausius and James Clerk Maxwell to explain the laws of thermodynamics.

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/ad/Boltzmann2.jpg/180px-
Boltzmann2.jpg)](/wiki/File:Boltzmann2.jpg)[Ludwig
Boltzmann](/wiki/Ludwig\_Boltzmann "Ludwig Boltzmann") 
(1844-1906)

The kinetic theory in turn led to a revolutionary approach to science, the
[statistical mechanics](/wiki/Statistical\_mechanics "Statistical mechanics")
of [Ludwig Boltzmann](/wiki/Ludwig\_Boltzmann "Ludwig Boltzmann") (1844–1906)
and [Josiah Willard Gibbs](/wiki/Josiah\_Willard\_Gibbs "Josiah Willard Gibbs")
(1839–1903), which studies the statistics of microstates of a system and uses
statistics to determine the state of a physical system. Interrelating the
statistical likelihood of certain states of organization of these particles
with the energy of those states, Clausius reinterpreted the dissipation of
energy to be the statistical tendency of molecular configurations to pass
toward increasingly likely, increasingly disorganized states (coining the term
"[entropy](/wiki/Entropy "Entropy")" to describe the disorganization of a
state). The statistical versus absolute interpretations of the second law of
thermodynamics set up a dispute that would last for several decades (producing
arguments such as "[Maxwell's demon](/wiki/Maxwell%27s\_demon "Maxwell's
demon")"), and that would not be held to be definitively resolved until the
behavior of atoms was firmly established in the early 20th century.[63][64] In
1902, [James Jeans](/wiki/James\_Jeans "James Jeans") found the length scale
required for gravitational perturbations to grow in a static nearly
homogeneous medium.
