## Development and
acceptance[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Theory\_of\_relativity&action=edit&section=1
"Edit section: Development and acceptance")]

Main articles: [History of special
relativity](/wiki/History\_of\_special\_relativity "History of special
relativity") and [History of general
relativity](/wiki/History\_of\_general\_relativity "History of general
relativity")

[General relativity](/wiki/General\_relativity "General relativity") 
--- 
[![Spacetime curvature
schematic](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/63/Spacetime\_lattice\_analogy.svg/220px-
Spacetime\_lattice\_analogy.svg.png)](/wiki/File:Spacetime\_lattice\_analogy.svg
"Spacetime curvature schematic") G μ ν + Λ g μ ν = κ T μ ν {\displaystyle
G\_{\mu \nu }+\Lambda g\_{\mu \nu }={\kappa }T\_{\mu \nu }} ![{\\displaystyle
G\_{\\mu \\nu }+\\Lambda g\_{\\mu \\nu }={\\kappa }T\_{\\mu \\nu
}}](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest\_v1/media/math/render/svg/124ab80fcb17e2733cc17ff6f93da5e52f355c77) 
 
 \* [Introduction](/wiki/Introduction\_to\_general\_relativity "Introduction to general relativity")
 \* \* [History](/wiki/History\_of\_general\_relativity "History of general relativity")
 \* [Timeline](/wiki/Timeline\_of\_gravitational\_physics\_and\_relativity "Timeline of gravitational physics and relativity")
 \* [Tests](/wiki/Tests\_of\_general\_relativity "Tests of general relativity")
 \* [Mathematical formulation](/wiki/Mathematics\_of\_general\_relativity "Mathematics of general relativity")

 
Fundamental concepts

 \* [Equivalence principle](/wiki/Equivalence\_principle "Equivalence principle")
 \* [Special relativity](/wiki/Special\_relativity "Special relativity")
 \* [World line](/wiki/World\_line "World line")
 \* [Pseudo-Riemannian manifold](/wiki/Pseudo-Riemannian\_manifold "Pseudo-Riemannian manifold")

 
Phenomena|

 \* [Kepler problem](/wiki/Two-body\_problem\_in\_general\_relativity "Two-body problem in general relativity")
 \* [Gravitational lensing](/wiki/Gravitational\_lens "Gravitational lens")
 \* [Gravitational redshift](/wiki/Gravitational\_redshift "Gravitational redshift")
 \* [Gravitational time dilation](/wiki/Gravitational\_time\_dilation "Gravitational time dilation")
 \* [Gravitational waves](/wiki/Gravitational\_wave "Gravitational wave")
 \* [Frame-dragging](/wiki/Frame-dragging "Frame-dragging")
 \* [Geodetic effect](/wiki/Geodetic\_effect "Geodetic effect")
 \* [Event horizon](/wiki/Event\_horizon "Event horizon")
 \* [Singularity](/wiki/Gravitational\_singularity "Gravitational singularity")
 \* [Black hole](/wiki/Black\_hole "Black hole")

 
--- 
[Spacetime](/wiki/Spacetime "Spacetime") 
 
 \* [Spacetime diagrams](/wiki/Spacetime\_diagram "Spacetime diagram")
 \* [Minkowski spacetime](/wiki/Minkowski\_space "Minkowski space")
 \* [Einstein–Rosen bridge](/wiki/Wormhole "Wormhole")

 
 
 \* Equations
 \* Formalisms

| Equations 
--- 
 
 \* [Linearized gravity](/wiki/Linearized\_gravity "Linearized gravity")
 \* [Einstein field equations](/wiki/Einstein\_field\_equations "Einstein field equations")
 \* [Friedmann](/wiki/Friedmann\_equations "Friedmann equations")
 \* [Geodesics](/wiki/Geodesics\_in\_general\_relativity "Geodesics in general relativity")
 \* [Mathisson–Papapetrou–Dixon](/wiki/Mathisson%E2%80%93Papapetrou%E2%80%93Dixon\_equations "Mathisson–Papapetrou–Dixon equations")
 \* [Hamilton–Jacobi–Einstein](/wiki/Hamilton%E2%80%93Jacobi%E2%80%93Einstein\_equation "Hamilton–Jacobi–Einstein equation")

 
Formalisms 
 
 \* [ADM](/wiki/ADM\_formalism "ADM formalism")
 \* [BSSN](/wiki/BSSN\_formalism "BSSN formalism")
 \* [Post-Newtonian](/wiki/Parameterized\_post-Newtonian\_formalism "Parameterized post-Newtonian formalism")

 
Advanced theory 
 
 \* [Kaluza–Klein theory](/wiki/Kaluza%E2%80%93Klein\_theory "Kaluza–Klein theory")
 \* [Quantum gravity](/wiki/Quantum\_gravity "Quantum gravity")

 
 
[Solutions](/wiki/Exact\_solutions\_in\_general\_relativity "Exact solutions in
general relativity")

 \* [Schwarzschild](/wiki/Schwarzschild\_metric "Schwarzschild metric") ([interior](/wiki/Interior\_Schwarzschild\_metric "Interior Schwarzschild metric"))
 \* [Reissner–Nordström](/wiki/Reissner%E2%80%93Nordstr%C3%B6m\_metric "Reissner–Nordström metric")
 \* [Einstein–Rosen waves](/wiki/Einstein%E2%80%93Rosen\_metric "Einstein–Rosen metric")
 \* [Wormhole](/wiki/Wormhole "Wormhole")
 \* [Gödel](/wiki/G%C3%B6del\_metric "Gödel metric")
 \* [Kerr](/wiki/Kerr\_metric "Kerr metric")
 \* [Kerr–Newman](/wiki/Kerr%E2%80%93Newman\_metric "Kerr–Newman metric")
 \* [Kerr–Newman–de Sitter](/wiki/Kerr%E2%80%93Newman%E2%80%93de%E2%80%93Sitter\_metric "Kerr–Newman–de–Sitter metric")
 \* [Kasner](/wiki/Kasner\_metric "Kasner metric")
 \* [Lemaître–Tolman](/wiki/Lema%C3%AEtre%E2%80%93Tolman\_metric "Lemaître–Tolman metric")
 \* [Taub–NUT](/wiki/Taub%E2%80%93NUT\_space "Taub–NUT space")
 \* [Milne](/wiki/Milne\_model "Milne model")
 \* [Robertson–Walker](/wiki/Friedmann%E2%80%93Lema%C3%AEtre%E2%80%93Robertson%E2%80%93Walker\_metric "Friedmann–Lemaître–Robertson–Walker metric")
 \* [Oppenheimer–Snyder](/wiki/Oppenheimer%E2%80%93Snyder\_model "Oppenheimer–Snyder model")
 \* [pp-wave](/wiki/Pp-wave\_spacetime "Pp-wave spacetime")
 \* [van Stockum dust](/wiki/Van\_Stockum\_dust "Van Stockum dust")
 \* [Weyl−Lewis−Papapetrou](/wiki/Weyl%E2%80%93Lewis%E2%80%93Papapetrou\_coordinates "Weyl–Lewis–Papapetrou coordinates")
 \* [Hartle–Thorne](/wiki/Hartle%E2%80%93Thorne\_metric "Hartle–Thorne metric")

 
Scientists

 \* [Einstein](/wiki/Albert\_Einstein "Albert Einstein")
 \* [Lorentz](/wiki/Hendrik\_Lorentz "Hendrik Lorentz")
 \* [Hilbert](/wiki/David\_Hilbert "David Hilbert")
 \* [Poincaré](/wiki/Henri\_Poincar%C3%A9 "Henri Poincaré")
 \* [Schwarzschild](/wiki/Karl\_Schwarzschild "Karl Schwarzschild")
 \* [de Sitter](/wiki/Willem\_de\_Sitter "Willem de Sitter")
 \* [Reissner](/wiki/Hans\_Reissner "Hans Reissner")
 \* [Nordström](/wiki/Gunnar\_Nordstr%C3%B6m "Gunnar Nordström")
 \* [Weyl](/wiki/Hermann\_Weyl "Hermann Weyl")
 \* [Eddington](/wiki/Arthur\_Eddington "Arthur Eddington")
 \* [Friedman](/wiki/Alexander\_Friedmann "Alexander Friedmann")
 \* [Milne](/wiki/Edward\_Arthur\_Milne "Edward Arthur Milne")
 \* [Zwicky](/wiki/Fritz\_Zwicky "Fritz Zwicky")
 \* [Lemaître](/wiki/Georges\_Lema%C3%AEtre "Georges Lemaître")
 \* [Oppenheimer](/wiki/J.\_Robert\_Oppenheimer "J. Robert Oppenheimer")
 \* [Gödel](/wiki/Kurt\_G%C3%B6del "Kurt Gödel")
 \* [Wheeler](/wiki/John\_Archibald\_Wheeler "John Archibald Wheeler")
 \* [Robertson](/wiki/Howard\_P.\_Robertson "Howard P. Robertson")
 \* [Bardeen](/wiki/James\_M.\_Bardeen "James M. Bardeen")
 \* [Walker](/wiki/Arthur\_Geoffrey\_Walker "Arthur Geoffrey Walker")
 \* [Kerr](/wiki/Roy\_Kerr "Roy Kerr")
 \* [Chandrasekhar](/wiki/Subrahmanyan\_Chandrasekhar "Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar")
 \* [Ehlers](/wiki/J%C3%BCrgen\_Ehlers "Jürgen Ehlers")
 \* [Penrose](/wiki/Roger\_Penrose "Roger Penrose")
 \* [Hawking](/wiki/Stephen\_Hawking "Stephen Hawking")
 \* [Raychaudhuri](/wiki/Amal\_Kumar\_Raychaudhuri "Amal Kumar Raychaudhuri")
 \* [Taylor](/wiki/Joseph\_Hooton\_Taylor\_Jr. "Joseph Hooton Taylor Jr.")
 \* [Hulse](/wiki/Russell\_Alan\_Hulse "Russell Alan Hulse")
 \* [van Stockum](/wiki/Willem\_Jacob\_van\_Stockum "Willem Jacob van Stockum")
 \* [Taub](/wiki/Abraham\_H.\_Taub "Abraham H. Taub")
 \* [Newman](/wiki/Ezra\_T.\_Newman "Ezra T. Newman")
 \* [Yau](/wiki/Shing-Tung\_Yau "Shing-Tung Yau")
 \* [Thorne](/wiki/Kip\_Thorne "Kip Thorne")
 \* [\_others\_](/wiki/List\_of\_contributors\_to\_general\_relativity "List of contributors to general relativity")

 
 
 \* [![icon](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/6f/Stylised\_atom\_with\_three\_Bohr\_model\_orbits\_and\_stylised\_nucleus.svg/14px-Stylised\_atom\_with\_three\_Bohr\_model\_orbits\_and\_stylised\_nucleus.svg.png)](/wiki/File:Stylised\_atom\_with\_three\_Bohr\_model\_orbits\_and\_stylised\_nucleus.svg) [Physics portal](/wiki/Portal:Physics "Portal:Physics")
 \* ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/9/96/Symbol\_category\_class.svg/16px-Symbol\_category\_class.svg.png) [Category](/wiki/Category:General\_relativity "Category:General relativity")

 
 
 \* [v](/wiki/Template:General\_relativity\_sidebar "Template:General relativity sidebar")
 \* [t](/wiki/Template\_talk:General\_relativity\_sidebar "Template talk:General relativity sidebar")
 \* [e](/wiki/Special:EditPage/Template:General\_relativity\_sidebar "Special:EditPage/Template:General relativity sidebar")

 
 
[Albert Einstein](/wiki/Albert\_Einstein "Albert Einstein") published the
theory of [special relativity](/wiki/Special\_relativity "Special relativity")
in 1905, building on many theoretical results and empirical findings obtained
by [Albert A. Michelson](/wiki/Albert\_A.\_Michelson "Albert A. Michelson"),
[Hendrik Lorentz](/wiki/Hendrik\_Lorentz "Hendrik Lorentz"), [Henri
Poincaré](/wiki/Henri\_Poincar%C3%A9 "Henri Poincaré") and others. [Max
Planck](/wiki/Max\_Planck "Max Planck"), [Hermann
Minkowski](/wiki/Hermann\_Minkowski "Hermann Minkowski") and others did
subsequent work.

Einstein developed [general relativity](/wiki/General\_relativity "General
relativity") between 1907 and 1915, with contributions by many others after
1915. The final form of general relativity was published in 1916.[3]

The term "theory of relativity" was based on the expression "relative theory"
([German](/wiki/German\_language "German language"): \_Relativtheorie\_) used in
1906 by Planck, who emphasized how the theory uses the [principle of
relativity](/wiki/Principle\_of\_relativity "Principle of relativity"). In the
discussion section of the same paper, [Alfred Bucherer](/wiki/Alfred\_Bucherer
"Alfred Bucherer") used for the first time the expression "theory of
relativity" ([German](/wiki/German\_language "German language"):
\_Relativitätstheorie\_).[6][7]

By the 1920s, the physics community understood and accepted special
relativity.[8] It rapidly became a significant and necessary tool for
theorists and experimentalists in the new fields of [atomic
physics](/wiki/Atomic\_physics "Atomic physics"), [nuclear
physics](/wiki/Nuclear\_physics "Nuclear physics"), and [quantum
mechanics](/wiki/Quantum\_mechanics "Quantum mechanics").

By comparison, general relativity did not appear to be as useful, beyond
making minor corrections to predictions of Newtonian gravitation theory.[3] It
seemed to offer little potential for experimental test, as most of its
assertions were on an astronomical scale. Its
[mathematics](/wiki/Tensor\_analysis "Tensor analysis") seemed difficult and
fully understandable only by a small number of people. Around 1960, general
relativity became central to physics and astronomy. New mathematical
techniques to apply to general relativity streamlined calculations and made
its concepts more easily visualized. As astronomical
[phenomena](/wiki/Phenomena "Phenomena") were discovered, such as
[quasars](/wiki/Quasars "Quasars") (1963), the 3-kelvin [microwave background
radiation](/wiki/Microwave\_background\_radiation "Microwave background
radiation") (1965), [pulsars](/wiki/Pulsar "Pulsar") (1967), and the first
[black hole](/wiki/Black\_hole "Black hole") candidates (1981),[3] the theory
explained their attributes, and measurement of them further confirmed the
theory.
