## Ancient usage[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Theory&action=edit&section=1 "Edit
section: Ancient usage")]

The English word \_theory\_ derives from a technical term in philosophy in
[Ancient Greek](/wiki/Classical\_Greece "Classical Greece"). As an everyday
word, \_[theoria](/wiki/Theoria "Theoria")\_ , θεωρία, meant "looking at,
viewing, beholding", but in more technical contexts it came to refer to
[contemplative](/wiki/Contemplation "Contemplation") or
[speculative](/wiki/Speculative\_reason "Speculative reason") understandings of
[natural things](/wiki/Nature\_\(philosophy\) "Nature \(philosophy\)"), such as
those of [natural philosophers](/wiki/Natural\_philosopher "Natural
philosopher"), as opposed to more practical ways of knowing things, like that
of skilled orators or artisans.[b] English-speakers have used the word
\_theory\_ since at least the late 16th century.[7] Modern uses of the word
\_theory\_ derive from the original definition, but have taken on new shades of
meaning, still based on the idea of a theory as a thoughtful and
[rational](/wiki/Reason "Reason") explanation of the general
[nature](/wiki/Nature\_\(philosophy\) "Nature \(philosophy\)") of things.

Although it has more mundane meanings in Greek, the word θεωρία apparently
developed special uses early in the recorded history of the [Greek
language](/wiki/Greek\_language "Greek language"). In the book \_From Religion
to Philosophy\_ , [Francis Cornford](/wiki/F.\_M.\_Cornford "F. M. Cornford")
suggests that the [Orphics](/wiki/Orphics "Orphics") used the word \_theoria\_
to mean "passionate sympathetic contemplation".[8]
[Pythagoras](/wiki/Pythagoras "Pythagoras") changed the word to mean "the
passionless contemplation of rational, unchanging truth" of mathematical
knowledge, because he considered this intellectual pursuit the way to reach
the highest plane of existence.[9] Pythagoras emphasized subduing emotions and
bodily desires to help the intellect function at the higher plane of theory.
Thus, it was Pythagoras who gave the word \_theory\_ the specific meaning that
led to the classical and modern concept of a distinction between theory (as
uninvolved, neutral thinking) and practice.[10]

Aristotle's terminology, as already mentioned, contrasts theory with \_praxis\_
or practice, and this contrast exists till today. For Aristotle, both practice
and theory involve thinking, but the aims are different. Theoretical
contemplation considers things humans do not move or change, such as
[nature](/wiki/Nature\_\(philosophy\) "Nature \(philosophy\)"), so it has no
human aim apart from itself and the knowledge it helps create. On the other
hand, \_praxis\_ involves thinking, but always with an aim to desired actions,
whereby humans cause change or movement themselves for their own ends. Any
human movement that involves no conscious choice and thinking could not be an
example of \_praxis\_ or doing.[c]
