## Formality[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Theory&action=edit&section=2 "Edit
section: Formality")]

Main article: [Theory (mathematical
logic)](/wiki/Theory\_\(mathematical\_logic\) "Theory \(mathematical logic\)")

Theories are [analytical](/wiki/Analysis "Analysis") tools for
[understanding](/wiki/Understanding "Understanding"),
[explaining](/wiki/Explanation "Explanation"), and making
[predictions](/wiki/Prediction "Prediction") about a given subject matter.
There are theories in many and varied fields of study, including the arts and
sciences. A formal theory is [syntactic](/wiki/Syntax\_\(logic\) "Syntax
\(logic\)") in nature and is only meaningful when given a
[semantic](/wiki/Semantics "Semantics") component by applying it to some
content (e.g., [facts](/wiki/Fact "Fact") and relationships of the actual
historical world as it is unfolding). Theories in various fields of study are
often expressed in [natural language](/wiki/Natural\_language "Natural
language"), but can be constructed in such a way that their general form is
identical to a theory as it is expressed in the [formal
language](/wiki/Formal\_language "Formal language") of [mathematical
logic](/wiki/Mathematical\_logic "Mathematical logic"). Theories may be
expressed mathematically, symbolically, or in common language, but are
generally expected to follow principles of [rational thought](/wiki/Reason
"Reason") or [logic](/wiki/Logic "Logic").

Theory is constructed of a set of [sentences](/wiki/Sentence\_\(linguistics\)
"Sentence \(linguistics\)") that are thought to be true statements about the
subject under consideration. However, the truth of any one of these statements
is always relative to the whole theory. Therefore, the same statement may be
true with respect to one theory, and not true with respect to another. This
is, in ordinary language, where statements such as "He is a terrible person"
cannot be judged as true or false without reference to some
[interpretation](/wiki/Interpretation\_\(logic\) "Interpretation \(logic\)") of
who "He" is and for that matter what a "terrible person" is under the
theory.[11]

Sometimes two theories have exactly the same [explanatory
power](/wiki/Explanatory\_power "Explanatory power") because they make the same
predictions. A pair of such theories is called indistinguishable or
[observationally equivalent](/wiki/Observational\_equivalence "Observational
equivalence"), and the choice between them reduces to convenience or
philosophical preference.[\_[citation needed](/wiki/Wikipedia:Citation\_needed
"Wikipedia:Citation needed")\_]

The [form of theories](/wiki/Metatheory "Metatheory") is studied formally in
mathematical logic, especially in [model theory](/wiki/Model\_theory "Model
theory"). When theories are studied in mathematics, they are usually expressed
in some formal language and their statements are
[closed](/wiki/Closure\_\(mathematics\) "Closure \(mathematics\)") under
application of certain procedures called [rules of
inference](/wiki/Rules\_of\_inference "Rules of inference"). A special case of
this, an axiomatic theory, consists of [axioms](/wiki/Axioms "Axioms") (or
axiom schemata) and rules of inference. A [theorem](/wiki/Theorem "Theorem")
is a statement that can be derived from those axioms by application of these
rules of inference. Theories used in applications are
[abstractions](/wiki/Abstraction "Abstraction") of observed phenomena and the
resulting theorems provide solutions to real-world problems. Obvious examples
include [arithmetic](/wiki/Arithmetic "Arithmetic") (abstracting concepts of
number), [geometry](/wiki/Geometry "Geometry") (concepts of space), and
[probability](/wiki/Probability "Probability") (concepts of randomness and
likelihood).

[Gödel's incompleteness theorem](/wiki/G%C3%B6del%27s\_incompleteness\_theorem
"Gödel's incompleteness theorem") shows that no consistent, [recursively
enumerable](/wiki/Recursively\_enumerable "Recursively enumerable") theory
(that is, one whose theorems form a recursively enumerable set) in which the
concept of [natural numbers](/wiki/Natural\_numbers "Natural numbers") can be
expressed, can include all [true](/wiki/Truth "Truth") statements about them.
As a result, some domains of knowledge cannot be formalized, accurately and
completely, as mathematical theories. (Here, formalizing accurately and
completely means that all true propositions—and only true propositions—are
derivable within the mathematical system.) This limitation, however, in no way
precludes the construction of mathematical theories that formalize large
bodies of scientific knowledge.
