### Applications to condensed matter
physics[[edit](/w/index.php?title=String\_theory&action=edit&section=17 "Edit
section: Applications to condensed matter physics")]

Main article: [AdS/CMT correspondence](/wiki/AdS/CMT\_correspondence "AdS/CMT
correspondence")

The AdS/CFT correspondence has also been used to study aspects of condensed
matter physics. Over the decades, [experimental](/wiki/Experimental\_physics
"Experimental physics") condensed matter physicists have discovered a number
of exotic states of matter, including [superconductors](/wiki/Superconductors
"Superconductors") and [superfluids](/wiki/Superfluids "Superfluids"). These
states are described using the formalism of quantum field theory, but some
phenomena are difficult to explain using standard field theoretic techniques.
Some condensed matter theorists including [Subir Sachdev](/wiki/Subir\_Sachdev
"Subir Sachdev") hope that the AdS/CFT correspondence will make it possible to
describe these systems in the language of string theory and learn more about
their behavior.[7]

So far some success has been achieved in using string theory methods to
describe the transition of a superfluid to an
[insulator](/wiki/Insulator\_\(electricity\) "Insulator \(electricity\)"). A
superfluid is a system of [electrically neutral](/wiki/Electrically\_neutral
"Electrically neutral") [atoms](/wiki/Atoms "Atoms") that flows without any
[friction](/wiki/Friction "Friction"). Such systems are often produced in the
laboratory using [liquid helium](/wiki/Liquid\_helium "Liquid helium"), but
recently experimentalists have developed new ways of producing artificial
superfluids by pouring trillions of cold atoms into a lattice of criss-
crossing [lasers](/wiki/Lasers "Lasers"). These atoms initially behave as a
superfluid, but as experimentalists increase the intensity of the lasers, they
become less mobile and then suddenly transition to an insulating state. During
the transition, the atoms behave in an unusual way. For example, the atoms
slow to a halt at a rate that depends on the [temperature](/wiki/Temperature
"Temperature") and on the [Planck constant](/wiki/Planck\_constant "Planck
constant"), the fundamental parameter of quantum mechanics, which does not
enter into the description of the other [phases](/wiki/Phase\_\(matter\) "Phase
\(matter\)"). This behavior has recently been understood by considering a dual
description where properties of the fluid are described in terms of a higher
dimensional black hole.[8]
