### Cooperative / non-
cooperative[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Game\_theory&action=edit&section=7 "Edit
section: Cooperative / non-cooperative")]

Main articles: [Cooperative game theory](/wiki/Cooperative\_game\_theory
"Cooperative game theory") and [Non-cooperative game](/wiki/Non-
cooperative\_game "Non-cooperative game")

A game is \_cooperative\_ if the players are able to form binding commitments
externally enforced (e.g. through [contract law](/wiki/Contract\_law "Contract
law")). A game is \_non-cooperative\_ if players cannot form alliances or if all
agreements need to be [self-enforcing](/wiki/Self-enforcing\_agreement "Self-
enforcing agreement") (e.g. through [credible threats](/wiki/Credible\_threat
"Credible threat")).[17]

Cooperative games are often analyzed through the framework of \_cooperative
game theory\_ , which focuses on predicting which coalitions will form, the
joint actions that groups take, and the resulting collective payoffs. It is
different from \_non-cooperative game theory\_ which focuses on predicting
individual players' actions and payoffs by analyzing [Nash
equilibria](/wiki/Nash\_equilibria "Nash equilibria").[18][19]

Cooperative game theory provides a high-level approach as it describes only
the structure and payoffs of coalitions, whereas non-cooperative game theory
also looks at how strategic interaction will affect the distribution of
payoffs. As non-cooperative game theory is more general, cooperative games can
be analyzed through the approach of non-cooperative game theory (the converse
does not hold) provided that sufficient assumptions are made to encompass all
the possible strategies available to players due to the possibility of
external enforcement of cooperation.
