### Other
developments[[edit](/w/index.php?title=History\_of\_physics&action=edit&section=22
"Edit section: Other developments")]

In 1822, botanist [Robert
Brown](/wiki/Robert\_Brown\_\(Scottish\_botanist\_from\_Montrose\) "Robert Brown
\(Scottish botanist from Montrose\)") discovered [Brownian
motion](/wiki/Brownian\_motion "Brownian motion"): pollen grains in water
undergoing movement resulting from their bombardment by the fast-moving atoms
or molecules in the liquid.

In 1834, [Carl Jacobi](/wiki/Carl\_Gustav\_Jakob\_Jacobi "Carl Gustav Jakob
Jacobi") discovered his uniformly rotating self-gravitating ellipsoids (the
[Jacobi ellipsoid](/wiki/Jacobi\_ellipsoid "Jacobi ellipsoid")).

In 1834, [John Russell](/wiki/John\_Scott\_Russell "John Scott Russell")
observed a nondecaying solitary water wave ([soliton](/wiki/Soliton
"Soliton")) in the [Union Canal](/wiki/Union\_Canal\_\(Scotland\) "Union Canal
\(Scotland\)") near [Edinburgh](/wiki/Edinburgh "Edinburgh") and used a water
tank to study the dependence of solitary water wave velocities on wave
amplitude and water depth. In 1835, [Gaspard Coriolis](/wiki/Gaspard-
Gustave\_Coriolis "Gaspard-Gustave Coriolis") examined theoretically the
mechanical efficiency of waterwheels, and deduced the [Coriolis
effect](/wiki/Coriolis\_effect "Coriolis effect"). In 1842, [Christian
Doppler](/wiki/Christian\_Doppler "Christian Doppler") proposed the [Doppler
effect](/wiki/Doppler\_effect "Doppler effect").

In 1851, [Léon Foucault](/wiki/L%C3%A9on\_Foucault "Léon Foucault") showed the
Earth's rotation with a huge [pendulum](/wiki/Pendulum "Pendulum") ([Foucault
pendulum](/wiki/Foucault\_pendulum "Foucault pendulum")).

There were important advances in [continuum
mechanics](/wiki/Continuum\_mechanics "Continuum mechanics") in the first half
of the century, namely formulation of [laws of
elasticity](/wiki/Elastic\_modulus "Elastic modulus") for solids and discovery
of [Navier–Stokes equations](/wiki/Navier%E2%80%93Stokes\_equations
"Navier–Stokes equations") for fluids.
