### Use of game theory in
biology[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Game\_theory&action=edit&section=34 "Edit
section: Use of game theory in biology")]

| Hawk | Dove 
---|---|--- 
Hawk | 20, 20 | 80, 40 
Dove | 40, 80 | 60, 60 
\_The[hawk-dove](/wiki/Chicken\_\(game\)#Hawk-Dove "Chicken \(game\)") game\_ 
 
Main article: [Evolutionary game theory](/wiki/Evolutionary\_game\_theory
"Evolutionary game theory")

Unlike those in economics, the payoffs for games in [biology](/wiki/Biology
"Biology") are often interpreted as corresponding to
[fitness](/wiki/Fitness\_\(biology\) "Fitness \(biology\)"). In addition, the
focus has been less on equilibria that correspond to a notion of rationality
and more on ones that would be maintained by evolutionary forces. The best-
known equilibrium in biology is known as the \_[evolutionarily stable
strategy](/wiki/Evolutionarily\_stable\_strategy "Evolutionarily stable
strategy")\_ (ESS), first introduced in (Maynard Smith & Price 1973). Although
its initial motivation did not involve any of the mental requirements of the
Nash equilibrium, every ESS is a Nash equilibrium.

In biology, game theory has been used as a model to understand many different
phenomena. It was first used to explain the evolution (and stability) of the
approximate 1:1 [sex ratios](/wiki/Sex\_ratio "Sex ratio"). (Fisher 1930)
suggested that the 1:1 sex ratios are a result of evolutionary forces acting
on individuals who could be seen as trying to maximize their number of
grandchildren.

Additionally, biologists have used evolutionary game theory and the ESS to
explain the emergence of [animal communication](/wiki/Animal\_communication
"Animal communication").[122] The analysis of [signaling
games](/wiki/Signaling\_games "Signaling games") and [other communication
games](/wiki/Cheap\_talk "Cheap talk") has provided insight into the evolution
of communication among animals. For example, the [mobbing
behavior](/wiki/Mobbing\_behavior "Mobbing behavior") of many species, in which
a large number of prey animals attack a larger predator, seems to be an
example of spontaneous emergent organization. Ants have also been shown to
exhibit feed-forward behavior akin to fashion (see [Paul
Ormerod](/wiki/Paul\_Ormerod "Paul Ormerod")'s \_[Butterfly
Economics](/wiki/Butterfly\_Economics "Butterfly Economics")\_).

Biologists have used the [game of chicken](/wiki/Chicken\_\(game\) "Chicken
\(game\)") to analyze fighting behavior and territoriality.[123]

According to Maynard Smith, in the preface to \_Evolution and the Theory of
Games\_ , "paradoxically, it has turned out that game theory is more readily
applied to biology than to the field of economic behaviour for which it was
originally designed". Evolutionary game theory has been used to explain many
seemingly incongruous phenomena in nature.[124]

One such phenomenon is known as [biological
altruism](/wiki/Altruism\_in\_animals "Altruism in animals"). This is a
situation in which an organism appears to act in a way that benefits other
organisms and is detrimental to itself. This is distinct from traditional
notions of altruism because such actions are not conscious, but appear to be
evolutionary adaptations to increase overall fitness. Examples can be found in
species ranging from vampire bats that regurgitate blood they have obtained
from a night's hunting and give it to group members who have failed to feed,
to worker bees that care for the queen bee for their entire lives and never
mate, to [vervet monkeys](/wiki/Vervet\_monkey "Vervet monkey") that warn group
members of a predator's approach, even when it endangers that individual's
chance of survival.[125] All of these actions increase the overall fitness of
a group, but occur at a cost to the individual.

Evolutionary game theory explains this altruism with the idea of [kin
selection](/wiki/Kin\_selection "Kin selection"). Altruists discriminate
between the individuals they help and favor relatives. [Hamilton's
rule](/wiki/Kin\_selection#Hamilton's\_rule "Kin selection") explains the
evolutionary rationale behind this selection with the equation c < b × r,
where the cost c to the altruist must be less than the benefit b to the
recipient multiplied by the coefficient of relatedness r. The more closely
related two organisms are causes the incidences of altruism to increase
because they share many of the same alleles. This means that the altruistic
individual, by ensuring that the alleles of its close relative are passed on
through survival of its offspring, can forgo the option of having offspring
itself because the same number of alleles are passed on. For example, helping
a sibling (in diploid animals) has a coefficient of 1⁄2, because (on average)
an individual shares half of the alleles in its sibling's offspring. Ensuring
that enough of a sibling's offspring survive to adulthood precludes the
necessity of the altruistic individual producing offspring.[125] The
coefficient values depend heavily on the scope of the playing field; for
example if the choice of whom to favor includes all genetic living things, not
just all relatives, we assume the discrepancy between all humans only accounts
for approximately 1% of the diversity in the playing field, a coefficient that
was 1⁄2 in the smaller field becomes 0.995. Similarly if it is considered that
information other than that of a genetic nature (e.g. epigenetics, religion,
science, etc.) persisted through time the playing field becomes larger still,
and the discrepancies smaller.
