#### Milky Way and
stars[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Galileo\_Galilei&action=edit&section=13 "Edit
section: Milky Way and stars")]

Galileo observed the [Milky Way](/wiki/Milky\_Way "Milky Way"), previously
believed to be [nebulous](/wiki/Nebula "Nebula"), and found it to be a
multitude of stars packed so densely that they appeared from Earth to be
clouds. He located many other stars too distant to be visible to the naked
eye. He observed the double star [Mizar](/wiki/Mizar\_\(star\) "Mizar
\(star\)") in [Ursa Major](/wiki/Ursa\_Major "Ursa Major") in 1617.[75]

In the \_Starry Messenger\_ , Galileo reported that stars appeared as mere
blazes of light, essentially unaltered in appearance by the telescope, and
contrasted them to planets, which the telescope revealed to be discs. But
shortly thereafter, in his \_[Letters on Sunspots](/wiki/Letters\_on\_Sunspots
"Letters on Sunspots")\_ , he reported that the telescope revealed the shapes
of both stars and planets to be "quite round". From that point forward, he
continued to report that telescopes showed the roundness of stars, and that
stars seen through the telescope measured a few seconds of arc in
diameter.[76][77] He also devised a method for measuring the apparent size of
a star without a telescope. As described in his \_[Dialogue Concerning the Two
Chief World Systems](/wiki/Dialogue\_Concerning\_the\_Two\_Chief\_World\_Systems
"Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems")\_ , his method was to hang a
thin rope in his line of sight to the star and measure the maximum distance
from which it would wholly obscure the star. From his measurements of this
distance and of the width of the rope, he could calculate the angle subtended
by the star at his viewing point.[78][79][80]

In his \_Dialogue\_ , he reported that he had found the apparent diameter of a
star of [first magnitude](/wiki/Stellar\_magnitude "Stellar magnitude") to be
no more than 5 [arcseconds](/wiki/Arcsecond "Arcsecond"), and that of one of
sixth magnitude to be about 5/6 arcseconds. Like most astronomers of his day,
Galileo did not recognise that the apparent sizes of stars that he measured
were spurious, caused by diffraction and atmospheric distortion, and did not
represent the true sizes of stars. However, Galileo's values were much smaller
than previous estimates of the apparent sizes of the brightest stars, such as
those made by Brahe, and enabled Galileo to counter anti-Copernican arguments
such as those made by Tycho that these stars would have to be absurdly large
for their annual [parallaxes](/wiki/Stellar\_parallax "Stellar parallax") to be
undetectable.[81][82][83] Other astronomers such as Simon Marius, [Giovanni
Battista Riccioli](/wiki/Giovanni\_Battista\_Riccioli "Giovanni Battista
Riccioli"), and [Martinus Hortensius](/wiki/Martin\_van\_den\_Hove "Martin van
den Hove") made similar measurements of stars, and Marius and Riccioli
concluded the smaller sizes were not small enough to answer Tycho's
argument.[84][85]
