## Career and first scientific
contributions[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Galileo\_Galilei&action=edit&section=4
"Edit section: Career and first scientific contributions")]

Although Galileo seriously considered the priesthood as a young man, at his
father's urging he instead enrolled in 1580 at the [University of
Pisa](/wiki/University\_of\_Pisa "University of Pisa") for a medical degree.[33]
He was influenced by the lectures of [Girolamo Borro](/wiki/Girolamo\_Borro
"Girolamo Borro") and [Francesco
Buonamici](/wiki/Francesco\_Buonamici\_\(philosopher\) "Francesco Buonamici
\(philosopher\)") of Florence.[20] In 1581, when he was studying medicine, he
noticed a swinging [chandelier](/wiki/Chandelier "Chandelier"), which air
currents shifted about to swing in larger and smaller arcs. To him, it seemed,
by comparison with his heartbeat, that the chandelier took the same amount of
time to swing back and forth, no matter how far it was swinging. When he
returned home, he set up two [pendulums](/wiki/Pendulum "Pendulum") of equal
length and swung one with a large sweep and the other with a small sweep and
found that they kept time together. It was not until the work of [Christiaan
Huygens](/wiki/Christiaan\_Huygens "Christiaan Huygens"), almost one hundred
years later, that the [tautochrone](/wiki/Tautochrone\_curve "Tautochrone
curve") nature of a swinging pendulum was used to create an accurate
timepiece.[34] Up to this point, Galileo had deliberately been kept away from
mathematics, since a physician earned a higher income than a mathematician.
However, after accidentally attending a lecture on geometry, he talked his
reluctant father into letting him study mathematics and [natural
philosophy](/wiki/Natural\_philosophy "Natural philosophy") instead of
medicine.[34] He created a [thermoscope](/wiki/Thermoscope "Thermoscope"), a
forerunner of the [thermometer](/wiki/Thermometer "Thermometer"), and, in
1586, published a small book on the design of a
[hydrostatic](/wiki/Hydrostatic "Hydrostatic") balance he had invented (which
first brought him to the attention of the scholarly world). Galileo also
studied \_disegno\_ , a term encompassing fine art, and, in 1588, obtained the
position of instructor in the [Accademia delle Arti del
Disegno](/wiki/Accademia\_delle\_Arti\_del\_Disegno "Accademia delle Arti del
Disegno") in Florence, teaching perspective and
[chiaroscuro](/wiki/Chiaroscuro "Chiaroscuro"). In the same year, upon
invitation by the [Florentine Academy](/wiki/Florentine\_Academy "Florentine
Academy"), he presented two lectures, \_[On the Shape, Location, and Size of
Dante's Inferno](/wiki/On\_the\_Shape,\_Location,\_and\_Size\_of\_Dante%27s\_Inferno
"On the Shape, Location, and Size of Dante's Inferno")\_ , in an attempt to
propose a rigorous cosmological model of [Dante's
hell](/wiki/Inferno\_\(Dante\) "Inferno \(Dante\)").[35] Being inspired by the
artistic tradition of the city and the works of the [Renaissance
artists](/wiki/Renaissance\_art "Renaissance art"), Galileo acquired an
[aesthetic mentality](/wiki/Aestheticism "Aestheticism"). While a young
teacher at the Accademia, he began a lifelong friendship with the Florentine
painter [Cigoli](/wiki/Cigoli "Cigoli").[36][37]

In 1589, he was appointed to the chair of mathematics in Pisa. In 1591, his
father died, and he was entrusted with the care of his younger brother
[Michelagnolo](/wiki/Michelagnolo\_Galilei "Michelagnolo Galilei"). In 1592, he
moved to the [University of Padua](/wiki/University\_of\_Padua "University of
Padua") where he taught geometry, [mechanics](/wiki/Mechanics "Mechanics"),
and astronomy until 1610.[38] During this period, Galileo made significant
discoveries in both pure [fundamental science](/wiki/Fundamental\_science
"Fundamental science") (for example, [kinematics](/wiki/Kinematics
"Kinematics") of motion and astronomy) as well as practical [applied
science](/wiki/Applied\_science "Applied science") (for example, strength of
materials and pioneering the telescope). His multiple interests included the
study of [astrology](/wiki/Astrology "Astrology"), which at the time was a
discipline tied to the studies of mathematics and astronomy.[39][40]
