### Application and
influence[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Physics&action=edit&section=15 "Edit
section: Application and influence")]

Main article: [Applied physics](/wiki/Applied\_physics "Applied physics")

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/bc/Prediction\_of\_sound\_scattering\_from\_Schroeder\_Diffuser.jpg/170px-
Prediction\_of\_sound\_scattering\_from\_Schroeder\_Diffuser.jpg)](/wiki/File:Prediction\_of\_sound\_scattering\_from\_Schroeder\_Diffuser.jpg)Classical
physics implemented in an [acoustic engineering](/wiki/Acoustic\_engineering
"Acoustic engineering") model of sound reflecting from an acoustic diffuser
[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/22/Archimedes-screw\_one-
screw-threads\_with-ball\_3D-view\_animated\_small.gif/220px-Archimedes-screw\_one-
screw-threads\_with-ball\_3D-view\_animated\_small.gif)](/wiki/File:Archimedes-
screw\_one-screw-threads\_with-ball\_3D-view\_animated\_small.gif)[Archimedes'
screw](/wiki/Archimedes%27\_screw "Archimedes' screw"), a [simple
machine](/wiki/Simple\_machine "Simple machine") for lifting

Applied physics is a general term for physics research, which is intended for
a particular use. An applied physics curriculum usually contains a few classes
in an applied discipline, like geology or electrical engineering. It usually
differs from engineering in that an applied physicist may not be designing
something in particular, but rather is using physics or conducting physics
research with the aim of developing new technologies or solving a problem.

The approach is similar to that of [applied
mathematics](/wiki/Applied\_mathematics "Applied mathematics"). Applied
physicists use physics in scientific research. For instance, people working on
[accelerator physics](/wiki/Accelerator\_physics "Accelerator physics") might
seek to build better [particle detectors](/wiki/Particle\_detector "Particle
detector") for research in theoretical physics.

Physics is used heavily in engineering. For example, statics, a subfield of
[mechanics](/wiki/Mechanics "Mechanics"), is used in the building of bridges
and other static structures. The understanding and use of acoustics results in
sound control and better concert halls; similarly, the use of optics creates
better optical devices. An understanding of physics makes for more realistic
[flight simulators](/wiki/Flight\_simulator "Flight simulator"), video games,
and movies, and is often critical in [forensic](/wiki/Forensic "Forensic")
investigations.

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/a0/Military\_laser\_experiment.jpg/220px-
Military\_laser\_experiment.jpg)](/wiki/File:Military\_laser\_experiment.jpg)Experiment
using a [laser](/wiki/Laser "Laser")

With the [standard consensus](/wiki/Uniformitarianism\_\(science\)
"Uniformitarianism \(science\)") that the [laws](/wiki/Scientific\_law
"Scientific law") of physics are universal and do not change with time,
physics can be used to study things that would ordinarily be mired in
[uncertainty](/wiki/Uncertainty "Uncertainty"). For example, in the study of
the origin of the Earth, a physicist can reasonably model Earth's mass,
temperature, and rate of rotation, as a function of time allowing the
extrapolation forward or backward in time and so predict future or prior
events. It also allows for simulations in engineering that speed up the
development of a new technology.

There is also considerable [interdisciplinarity](/wiki/Interdisciplinarity
"Interdisciplinarity"), so many other important fields are influenced by
physics (e.g., the fields of [econophysics](/wiki/Econophysics "Econophysics")
and [sociophysics](/wiki/Sociophysics "Sociophysics")).
