### Turkey[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Conspiracy\_theory&action=edit&section=33
"Edit section: Turkey")]

Main article: [Conspiracy theories in
Turkey](/wiki/Conspiracy\_theories\_in\_Turkey "Conspiracy theories in Turkey")

Conspiracy theories are a prevalent feature of culture and politics in
[Turkey](/wiki/Turkey "Turkey"). Conspiracism is an important phenomenon in
understanding Turkish politics.[167] This is explained by a desire to "make up
for our lost [Ottoman](/wiki/Ottoman\_Empire "Ottoman Empire") grandeur",[167]
the humiliation of perceiving Turkey as part of "the malfunctioning half" of
the world,[168] and a "low level of media literacy among the Turkish
population."[169]

There are a wide variety of conspiracy theories including the [Judeo-Masonic
conspiracy theory](/wiki/Judeo-Masonic\_conspiracy\_theory "Judeo-Masonic
conspiracy theory"),[170][171] the [international Jewish conspiracy
theory](/wiki/International\_Jewish\_conspiracy#Turkey "International Jewish
conspiracy"), and the [war against Islam conspiracy
theory](/wiki/War\_against\_Islam\_conspiracy\_theory "War against Islam
conspiracy theory"). For example, [Islamists](/wiki/Islamism "Islamism"),
dissatisfied with the [modernist](/wiki/Modernity "Modernity") and
[secularist](/wiki/Secularism "Secularism") reforms that took place throughout
the history of the Ottoman Empire and the Turkish Republic, have put forward
many conspiracy theories to defame the [Treaty of
Lausanne](/wiki/Treaty\_of\_Lausanne "Treaty of Lausanne"), an important peace
treaty for the country, and the republic's founder [Kemal
Atatürk](/wiki/Mustafa\_Kemal\_Atat%C3%BCrk "Mustafa Kemal Atatürk").[172][173]
Another example is the [Sèvres syndrome](/wiki/S%C3%A8vres\_syndrome "Sèvres
syndrome"), a reference to the [Treaty of Sèvres](/wiki/Treaty\_of\_S%C3%A8vres
"Treaty of Sèvres") of 1920, a popular belief in Turkey that dangerous
internal and external enemies, especially [the West](/wiki/Western\_world
"Western world"), are "conspiring to weaken and carve up the Turkish
Republic".[174]
