### Applications to nuclear
physics[[edit](/w/index.php?title=String\_theory&action=edit&section=16 "Edit
section: Applications to nuclear physics")]

Main article: [AdS/QCD correspondence](/wiki/AdS/QCD\_correspondence "AdS/QCD
correspondence")

[![A magnet levitating over a superconducting
material.](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/55/Meissner\_effect\_p1390048.jpg/220px-
Meissner\_effect\_p1390048.jpg)](/wiki/File:Meissner\_effect\_p1390048.jpg)A
[magnet](/wiki/Magnet "Magnet") [levitating](/wiki/Meissner\_effect "Meissner
effect") above a [high-temperature superconductor](/wiki/High-
temperature\_superconductor "High-temperature superconductor"). Today some
physicists are working to understand high-temperature superconductivity using
the AdS/CFT correspondence.[7]

In addition to its applications to theoretical problems in quantum gravity,
the AdS/CFT correspondence has been applied to a variety of problems in
quantum field theory. One physical system that has been studied using the
AdS/CFT correspondence is the [quark–gluon
plasma](/wiki/Quark%E2%80%93gluon\_plasma "Quark–gluon plasma"), an exotic
[state of matter](/wiki/State\_of\_matter "State of matter") produced in
[particle accelerators](/wiki/Particle\_accelerator "Particle accelerator").
This state of matter arises for brief instants when heavy [ions](/wiki/Ions
"Ions") such as [gold](/wiki/Gold "Gold") or [lead](/wiki/Lead "Lead") nuclei
are collided at high energies. Such collisions cause the [quarks](/wiki/Quarks
"Quarks") that make up atomic nuclei to [deconfine](/wiki/Deconfinement
"Deconfinement") at temperatures of approximately two
[trillion](/wiki/1,000,000,000,000 "1,000,000,000,000") [kelvin](/wiki/Kelvin
"Kelvin"), conditions similar to those present at around 10−11 seconds after
the [Big Bang](/wiki/Big\_Bang "Big Bang").[79]

The physics of the quark–gluon plasma is governed by a theory called [quantum
chromodynamics](/wiki/Quantum\_chromodynamics "Quantum chromodynamics"), but
this theory is mathematically intractable in problems involving the
quark–gluon plasma.[d] In an article appearing in 2005, [Đàm Thanh
Sơn](/wiki/%C4%90%C3%A0m\_Thanh\_S%C6%A1n "Đàm Thanh Sơn") and his collaborators
showed that the AdS/CFT correspondence could be used to understand some
aspects of the quark-gluon plasma by describing it in the language of string
theory.[80] By applying the AdS/CFT correspondence, Sơn and his collaborators
were able to describe the quark-gluon plasma in terms of black holes in five-
dimensional spacetime. The calculation showed that the ratio of two quantities
associated with the quark-gluon plasma, the [shear
viscosity](/wiki/Shear\_viscosity "Shear viscosity") and volume density of
entropy, should be approximately equal to a certain universal
[constant](/wiki/Constant\_\(mathematics\) "Constant \(mathematics\)"). In
2008, the predicted value of this ratio for the quark-gluon plasma was
confirmed at the [Relativistic Heavy Ion
Collider](/wiki/Relativistic\_Heavy\_Ion\_Collider "Relativistic Heavy Ion
Collider") at [Brookhaven National
Laboratory](/wiki/Brookhaven\_National\_Laboratory "Brookhaven National
Laboratory").[7][81]
