Physics developed since 1901

Part of a series on 
--- 
[Physics](/wiki/Physics "Physics") 
[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/6f/Stylised\_atom\_with\_three\_Bohr\_model\_orbits\_and\_stylised\_nucleus.svg/100px-
Stylised\_atom\_with\_three\_Bohr\_model\_orbits\_and\_stylised\_nucleus.svg.png)](/wiki/File:Stylised\_atom\_with\_three\_Bohr\_model\_orbits\_and\_stylised\_nucleus.svg)\*\*The
fundamental science\*\* 
 
 \* [Index](/wiki/Index\_of\_physics\_articles "Index of physics articles")
 \* [Outline](/wiki/Outline\_of\_physics "Outline of physics")
 \* [Glossary](/wiki/Glossary\_of\_physics "Glossary of physics")

 \* [History](/wiki/History\_of\_physics "History of physics") ([timeline](/wiki/Timeline\_of\_fundamental\_physics\_discoveries "Timeline of fundamental physics discoveries"))

 
[Branches](/wiki/Branches\_of\_physics "Branches of physics")

 \* [Acoustics](/wiki/Acoustics "Acoustics")
 \* [Astrophysics](/wiki/Astrophysics "Astrophysics")
 \* [Atomic physics](/wiki/Atomic\_physics "Atomic physics")
 \* [Biophysics](/wiki/Biophysics "Biophysics")
 \* [Classical physics](/wiki/Classical\_physics "Classical physics")
 \* [Electromagnetism](/wiki/Electromagnetism "Electromagnetism")
 \* [Geophysics](/wiki/Geophysics "Geophysics")
 \* [Mechanics](/wiki/Mechanics "Mechanics")
 \* Modern physics
 \* [Nuclear physics](/wiki/Nuclear\_physics "Nuclear physics")
 \* [Optics](/wiki/Optics "Optics")
 \* [Thermodynamics](/wiki/Thermodynamics "Thermodynamics")

 
Research

 \* [Physicist](/wiki/Physicist "Physicist") ([list](/wiki/List\_of\_physicists "List of physicists"))
 \* [List of physics awards](/wiki/List\_of\_physics\_awards "List of physics awards")
 \* [List of journals](/wiki/List\_of\_physics\_journals "List of physics journals")
 \* [List of unsolved problems](/wiki/List\_of\_unsolved\_problems\_in\_physics "List of unsolved problems in physics")

 
 
 \* [![icon](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/6f/Stylised\_atom\_with\_three\_Bohr\_model\_orbits\_and\_stylised\_nucleus.svg/14px-Stylised\_atom\_with\_three\_Bohr\_model\_orbits\_and\_stylised\_nucleus.svg.png)](/wiki/File:Stylised\_atom\_with\_three\_Bohr\_model\_orbits\_and\_stylised\_nucleus.svg) [Physics portal](/wiki/Portal:Physics "Portal:Physics")
 \* ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/9/96/Symbol\_category\_class.svg/16px-Symbol\_category\_class.svg.png) [Category](/wiki/Category:Physics "Category:Physics")

 
 
 \* [v](/wiki/Template:TopicTOC-Physics "Template:TopicTOC-Physics")
 \* [t](/wiki/Template\_talk:TopicTOC-Physics "Template talk:TopicTOC-Physics")
 \* [e](/wiki/Special:EditPage/Template:TopicTOC-Physics "Special:EditPage/Template:TopicTOC-Physics")

 
[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/56/Modernphysicsfields.svg/430px-
Modernphysicsfields.svg.png)](/wiki/File:Modernphysicsfields.svg)[Classical
physics](/wiki/Classical\_physics "Classical physics") is usually concerned
with everyday conditions: speeds are much lower than the [speed of
light](/wiki/Speed\_of\_light "Speed of light"), sizes are much greater than
that of atoms, yet very small in astronomical terms. Modern physics, however,
is concerned with high velocities, small distances, and very large energies.

\*\*Modern physics\*\* is a branch of [physics](/wiki/Physics "Physics") that
developed in the early 20th century and onward or branches greatly influenced
by early 20th century physics. Notable branches of modern physics include
[quantum mechanics](/wiki/Quantum\_mechanics "Quantum mechanics"), [special
relativity](/wiki/Special\_relativity "Special relativity"), and [general
relativity](/wiki/General\_relativity "General relativity").

[Classical physics](/wiki/Classical\_physics "Classical physics") is typically
concerned with everyday conditions: speeds are much lower than the [speed of
light](/wiki/Speed\_of\_light "Speed of light"), sizes are much greater than
that of atoms, and energies are relatively small. Modern physics, however, is
concerned with more extreme conditions, such as high velocities that are
comparable to the [speed of light](/wiki/Speed\_of\_light "Speed of light")
(special relativity), small distances comparable to the [atomic
radius](/wiki/Atomic\_radius "Atomic radius") ([quantum
mechanics](/wiki/Quantum\_mechanics "Quantum mechanics")), and very high
energies (relativity). In general, quantum and relativistic effects are
believed to exist across all scales, although these effects may be very small
at [human scale](/wiki/Human\_scale "Human scale"). While quantum mechanics is
compatible with special relativity (See: [Relativistic quantum
mechanics](/wiki/Relativistic\_quantum\_mechanics "Relativistic quantum
mechanics")), one of the [unsolved problems in
physics](/wiki/List\_of\_unsolved\_problems\_in\_physics "List of unsolved problems
in physics") is the unification of quantum mechanics and general relativity,
which the [Standard Model](/wiki/Standard\_Model "Standard Model") of [particle
physics](/wiki/Particle\_physics "Particle physics") currently cannot account
for.

Modern physics is an effort to understand the underlying processes of the
interactions of matter using the tools of science & engineering. In a literal
sense, the term \_modern physics\_ means up-to-date physics. In this sense, a
significant portion of so-called \_[classical physics](/wiki/Classical\_physics
"Classical physics")\_ is modern.[1] However, since roughly 1890, new
discoveries have caused significant [paradigm shifts](/wiki/Paradigm\_shift
"Paradigm shift"):[1] especially the advent of [quantum
mechanics](/wiki/Quantum\_mechanics "Quantum mechanics") (QM) and
[relativity](/wiki/Theory\_of\_relativity "Theory of relativity") (ER). Physics
that incorporates elements of either QM or ER (or both) is said to be \_modern
physics\_. It is in this latter sense that the term is generally used.[1]

Modern physics is often encountered when dealing with extreme conditions.
Quantum mechanical effects tend to appear when dealing with "lows" (low
temperatures, small distances), while relativistic effects tend to appear when
dealing with "highs" (high velocities, large distances), the "middles" being
classical behavior. For example, when analyzing the behavior of a gas at [room
temperature](/wiki/Room\_temperature "Room temperature"), most phenomena will
involve the (classical) [Maxwell–Boltzmann
distribution](/wiki/Maxwell%E2%80%93Boltzmann\_distribution "Maxwell–Boltzmann
distribution"). However, near [absolute zero](/wiki/Absolute\_zero "Absolute
zero"), the Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution fails to account for the observed
behavior of the gas, and the (modern)
[Fermi–Dirac](/wiki/Fermi%E2%80%93Dirac\_distribution "Fermi–Dirac
distribution") or [Bose–Einstein](/wiki/Bose%E2%80%93Einstein\_distribution
"Bose–Einstein distribution") distributions have to be used instead.

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/50/Albert\_Einstein\_%28Nobel%29.png/133px-
Albert\_Einstein\_%28Nobel%29.png)](/wiki/File:Albert\_Einstein\_\(Nobel\).png)

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/c7/Max\_Planck\_1933.jpg/151px-
Max\_Planck\_1933.jpg)](/wiki/File:Max\_Planck\_1933.jpg)

German physicists [Albert Einstein](/wiki/Albert\_Einstein "Albert Einstein")
(1879–1955), founder of the [theory of relativity](/wiki/Theory\_of\_relativity
"Theory of relativity"), and [Max Planck](/wiki/Max\_Planck "Max Planck")
(1858–1947), founder of [quantum theory](/wiki/Quantum\_mechanics "Quantum
mechanics")

Very often, it is possible to find – or "retrieve" – the classical behavior
from the modern description by analyzing the modern description at low speeds
and large distances (by taking a [limit](/wiki/Limit\_\(mathematics\) "Limit
\(mathematics\)"), or by making an [approximation](/wiki/Approximation\_theory
"Approximation theory")). When doing so, the result is called the \_[classical
limit](/wiki/Classical\_limit "Classical limit")\_.

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/19/Black\_body.svg/250px-
Black\_body.svg.png)](/wiki/File:Black\_body.svg)Classical physics
([Rayleigh–Jeans law](/wiki/Rayleigh%E2%80%93Jeans\_law "Rayleigh–Jeans law"),
black line) failed to explain [black-body radiation](/wiki/Black-
body\_radiation "Black-body radiation") – the so-called [ultraviolet
catastrophe](/wiki/Ultraviolet\_catastrophe "Ultraviolet catastrophe"). The
quantum description ([Planck's law](/wiki/Planck%27s\_law "Planck's law"),
colored lines) is said to be \_modern physics\_.
