### Zero-sum / non-zero-
sum[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Game\_theory&action=edit&section=9 "Edit section:
Zero-sum / non-zero-sum")]

| A | B 
---|---|--- 
A | –1, 1 | 3, −3 
B | 0, 0 | –2, 2 
\_A zero-sum game\_ 
 
Main article: [Zero-sum game](/wiki/Zero-sum\_game "Zero-sum game")

Zero-sum games (more generally, constant-sum games) are games in which choices
by players can neither increase nor decrease the available resources. In zero-
sum games, the total benefit goes to all players in a game, for every
combination of strategies, and always adds to zero (more informally, a player
benefits only at the equal expense of others).[21] [Poker](/wiki/Poker
"Poker") exemplifies a zero-sum game (ignoring the possibility of the house's
cut), because one wins exactly the amount one's opponents lose. Other zero-sum
games include [matching pennies](/wiki/Matching\_pennies "Matching pennies")
and most classical board games including [Go](/wiki/Go\_\(board\_game\) "Go
\(board game\)") and [chess](/wiki/Chess "Chess").

Many games studied by game theorists (including the famed prisoner's dilemma)
are non-zero-sum games, because the [outcome](/wiki/Outcome\_\(game\_theory\)
"Outcome \(game theory\)") has net results greater or less than zero.
Informally, in non-zero-sum games, a gain by one player does not necessarily
correspond with a loss by another.

Furthermore, \_constant-sum games\_ correspond to activities like theft and
gambling, but not to the fundamental economic situation in which there are
potential [gains from trade](/wiki/Gains\_from\_trade "Gains from trade"). It is
possible to transform any constant-sum game into a (possibly asymmetric) zero-
sum game by adding a dummy player (often called "the board") whose losses
compensate the players' net winnings.
