### Radiation
experiments[[edit](/w/index.php?title=History\_of\_physics&action=edit&section=24
"Edit section: Radiation experiments")]

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/c1/J.J\_Thomson.jpg/200px-J.J\_Thomson.jpg)](/wiki/File:J.J\_Thomson.jpg)[J.
J. Thomson](/wiki/J.\_J.\_Thomson "J. J. Thomson") (1856–1940) discovered the
[electron](/wiki/Electron "Electron") and [isotopy](/wiki/Isotope "Isotope")
and also invented the [mass spectrometer](/wiki/Mass\_spectrometer "Mass
spectrometer"). He was awarded the [Nobel Prize in
Physics](/wiki/Nobel\_Prize\_in\_Physics "Nobel Prize in Physics") in 1906.

In the 19th century, experimenters began to detect unexpected forms of
radiation: [Wilhelm Röntgen](/wiki/Wilhelm\_R%C3%B6ntgen "Wilhelm Röntgen")
caused a sensation with his discovery of [X-rays](/wiki/X-ray "X-ray") in
1895; in 1896 [Henri Becquerel](/wiki/Henri\_Becquerel "Henri Becquerel")
discovered that certain kinds of matter emit radiation on their own accord. In
1897, [J. J. Thomson](/wiki/J.\_J.\_Thomson "J. J. Thomson") discovered the
[electron](/wiki/Electron "Electron"), and new radioactive elements found by
[Marie](/wiki/Marie\_Curie "Marie Curie") and [Pierre Curie](/wiki/Pierre\_Curie
"Pierre Curie") raised questions about the supposedly indestructible atom and
the nature of matter. Marie and Pierre coined the term
"[radioactivity](/wiki/Radioactive\_decay "Radioactive decay")" to describe
this property of matter, and isolated the radioactive elements
[radium](/wiki/Radium "Radium") and [polonium](/wiki/Polonium "Polonium").
[Ernest Rutherford](/wiki/Ernest\_Rutherford "Ernest Rutherford") and
[Frederick Soddy](/wiki/Frederick\_Soddy "Frederick Soddy") identified two of
Becquerel's forms of radiation with electrons and the element
[helium](/wiki/Helium "Helium"). Rutherford identified and named two types of
radioactivity and in 1911 interpreted experimental evidence as showing that
the atom consists of a dense, positively charged nucleus surrounded by
negatively charged electrons. Classical theory, however, predicted that this
structure should be unstable. Classical theory had also failed to explain
successfully two other experimental results that appeared in the late 19th
century. One of these was the demonstration by [Albert A.
Michelson](/wiki/Albert\_A.\_Michelson "Albert A. Michelson") and [Edward W.
Morley](/wiki/Edward\_W.\_Morley "Edward W. Morley")—known as the
[Michelson–Morley experiment](/wiki/Michelson%E2%80%93Morley\_experiment
"Michelson–Morley experiment")—which showed there did not seem to be a
[preferred frame](/wiki/Preferred\_frame "Preferred frame") of reference, at
rest with respect to the hypothetical [luminiferous
ether](/wiki/Luminiferous\_ether "Luminiferous ether"), for describing
electromagnetic phenomena. Studies of radiation and radioactive decay
continued to be a preeminent focus for physical and chemical research through
the 1930s, when the [discovery of nuclear
fission](/wiki/Discovery\_of\_nuclear\_fission "Discovery of nuclear fission") by
[Lise Meitner](/wiki/Lise\_Meitner "Lise Meitner") and [Otto
Frisch](/wiki/Otto\_Frisch "Otto Frisch") opened the way to the practical
exploitation of what came to be called ["atomic" energy](/wiki/Nuclear\_power
"Nuclear power").
