### Quantum
mechanics[[edit](/w/index.php?title=History\_of\_physics&action=edit&section=28
"Edit section: Quantum mechanics")]

Further information: [History of quantum
mechanics](/wiki/History\_of\_quantum\_mechanics "History of quantum mechanics")

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/62/Max\_Planck\_1878.GIF/180px-
Max\_Planck\_1878.GIF)](/wiki/File:Max\_Planck\_1878.GIF)[Max
Planck](/wiki/Max\_Planck "Max Planck") 
(1858–1947)

Although relativity resolved the electromagnetic phenomena conflict
demonstrated by Michelson and Morley, a second theoretical problem was the
explanation of the distribution of electromagnetic radiation emitted by a
[black body](/wiki/Black\_body "Black body"); experiment showed that at shorter
wavelengths, toward the ultraviolet end of the spectrum, the energy approached
zero, but classical theory predicted it should become infinite. This glaring
discrepancy, known as the [ultraviolet
catastrophe](/wiki/Ultraviolet\_catastrophe "Ultraviolet catastrophe"), was
solved by the new theory of [quantum mechanics](/wiki/Quantum\_mechanics
"Quantum mechanics"). Quantum mechanics is the theory of [atoms](/wiki/Atom
"Atom") and subatomic systems. Approximately the first 30 years of the 20th
century represent the time of the conception and evolution of the theory. The
basic ideas of quantum theory were introduced in 1900 by Max Planck
(1858–1947), who was awarded the [Nobel Prize for
Physics](/wiki/Nobel\_Prize\_for\_Physics "Nobel Prize for Physics") in 1918 for
his discovery of the quantified nature of energy. The quantum theory (which
previously relied in the "correspondence" at large scales between the
quantized world of the atom and the continuities of the
"[classical](/wiki/Physics\_in\_the\_Classical\_Limit "Physics in the Classical
Limit")" world) was accepted when the [Compton Effect](/wiki/Compton\_Effect
"Compton Effect") established that light carries momentum and can scatter off
particles, and when [Louis de Broglie](/wiki/Louis\_de\_Broglie "Louis de
Broglie") asserted that matter can be seen as behaving as a wave in much the
same way as electromagnetic waves behave like particles ([wave–particle
duality](/wiki/Wave%E2%80%93particle\_duality "Wave–particle duality")).

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b0/Heisenberg\_10.jpg/180px-
Heisenberg\_10.jpg)](/wiki/File:Heisenberg\_10.jpg)[Werner
Heisenberg](/wiki/Werner\_Heisenberg "Werner Heisenberg") 
(1901–1976)

In 1905, Einstein used the quantum theory to explain the photoelectric effect,
and in 1913 the Danish physicist [Niels Bohr](/wiki/Niels\_Bohr "Niels Bohr")
used the same constant to explain the stability of [Rutherford's
atom](/wiki/Rutherford\_model "Rutherford model") as well as the frequencies of
light emitted by hydrogen gas. The quantized theory of the atom gave way to a
full-scale quantum mechanics in the 1920s. New principles of a "quantum"
rather than a "classical" mechanics, formulated in [matrix-
form](/wiki/Matrix\_mechanics "Matrix mechanics") by [Werner
Heisenberg](/wiki/Werner\_Heisenberg "Werner Heisenberg"), [Max
Born](/wiki/Max\_Born "Max Born"), and [Pascual Jordan](/wiki/Pascual\_Jordan
"Pascual Jordan") in 1925, were based on the probabilistic relationship
between discrete "states" and denied the possibility of
[causality](/wiki/Causality "Causality"). Quantum mechanics was extensively
developed by Heisenberg, [Wolfgang Pauli](/wiki/Wolfgang\_Pauli "Wolfgang
Pauli"), [Paul Dirac](/wiki/Paul\_Dirac "Paul Dirac"), and [Erwin
Schrödinger](/wiki/Erwin\_Schr%C3%B6dinger "Erwin Schrödinger"), who
established an equivalent theory based on waves in 1926; but Heisenberg's 1927
"[uncertainty principle](/wiki/Uncertainty\_principle "Uncertainty principle")"
(indicating the impossibility of precisely and simultaneously measuring
position and momentum) and the "[Copenhagen
interpretation](/wiki/Copenhagen\_interpretation "Copenhagen interpretation")"
of quantum mechanics (named after Bohr's home city) continued to deny the
possibility of fundamental causality, though opponents such as Einstein would
metaphorically assert that "God does not play dice with the universe".[66] The
new quantum mechanics became an indispensable tool in the investigation and
explanation of phenomena at the atomic level. Also in the 1920s, the Indian
scientist [Satyendra Nath Bose](/wiki/Satyendra\_Nath\_Bose "Satyendra Nath
Bose")'s work on [photons](/wiki/Photon "Photon") and quantum mechanics
provided the foundation for [Bose–Einstein
statistics](/wiki/Bose%E2%80%93Einstein\_statistics "Bose–Einstein
statistics"), the theory of the [Bose–Einstein
condensate](/wiki/Bose%E2%80%93Einstein\_condensate "Bose–Einstein
condensate").

The [spin–statistics theorem](/wiki/Spin%E2%80%93statistics\_theorem
"Spin–statistics theorem") established that any particle in quantum mechanics
may be either a [boson](/wiki/Boson "Boson") (statistically Bose–Einstein) or
a [fermion](/wiki/Fermion "Fermion") (statistically
[Fermi–Dirac](/wiki/Fermi%E2%80%93Dirac\_statistics "Fermi–Dirac statistics")).
It was later found that all [fundamental](/wiki/Elementary\_particle
"Elementary particle") bosons transmit forces, such as the photon that
transmits electromagnetism.

Fermions are particles "like electrons and nucleons" and are the usual
constituents of [matter](/wiki/Matter "Matter"). Fermi–Dirac statistics later
found numerous other uses, from astrophysics (see [Degenerate
matter](/wiki/Degenerate\_matter "Degenerate matter")) to
[semiconductor](/wiki/Semiconductor "Semiconductor") design.
