## Comparison with modern
physics[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Classical\_physics&action=edit&section=2
"Edit section: Comparison with modern physics")]

In contrast to classical physics, "[modern physics](/wiki/Modern\_physics
"Modern physics")" is a slightly looser term that may refer to just [quantum
physics](/wiki/Quantum\_physics "Quantum physics") or to [20th- and 21st-
century physics](/wiki/History\_of\_physics#20th\_century "History of physics")
in general. Modern physics includes quantum theory and relativity, when
applicable.

A [physical system](/wiki/Physical\_system "Physical system") can be described
by classical physics when it satisfies conditions such that the laws of
classical physics are approximately valid.

In practice, physical objects ranging from those larger than
[atoms](/wiki/Atom "Atom") and [molecules](/wiki/Molecule "Molecule"), to
objects in the macroscopic and astronomical realm, can be well-described
(understood) with classical mechanics. Beginning at the atomic level and
lower, the laws of classical physics break down and generally do not provide a
correct description of nature. Electromagnetic fields and forces can be
described well by classical electrodynamics at length scales and field
strengths large enough that quantum mechanical effects are negligible. Unlike
quantum physics, classical physics is generally characterized by the principle
of complete [determinism](/wiki/Scientific\_determinism "Scientific
determinism"), although deterministic interpretations of quantum mechanics do
exist.

From the point of view of classical physics as being non-relativistic physics,
the predictions of general and special relativity are significantly different
from those of classical theories, particularly concerning the passage of time,
the geometry of space, the motion of bodies in free fall, and the propagation
of light. Traditionally, light was reconciled with classical mechanics by
assuming the existence of a stationary medium through which light propagated,
the [luminiferous aether](/wiki/Luminiferous\_aether "Luminiferous aether"),
which was later shown not to exist.

Mathematically, classical physics equations are those in which [Planck's
constant](/wiki/Planck%27s\_constant "Planck's constant") does not appear.
According to the [correspondence principle](/wiki/Correspondence\_principle
"Correspondence principle") and [Ehrenfest's
theorem](/wiki/Ehrenfest%27s\_theorem "Ehrenfest's theorem"), as a system
becomes larger or more massive the classical dynamics tends to emerge, with
some exceptions, such as [superfluidity](/wiki/Superfluidity "Superfluidity").
This is why we can usually ignore quantum mechanics when dealing with everyday
objects and the classical description will suffice. However, one of the most
vigorous ongoing fields of research in physics is [classical-quantum
correspondence](/wiki/Decoherence#Loss\_of\_interference\_and\_the\_transition\_from\_quantum\_to\_classical
"Decoherence"). This field of research is concerned with the discovery of how
the laws of quantum physics give rise to classical physics found at the limit
of the large scales of the classical level.
