### Prize-winning
achievements[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Game\_theory&action=edit&section=5 "Edit
section: Prize-winning achievements")]

In 1965, [Reinhard Selten](/wiki/Reinhard\_Selten "Reinhard Selten") introduced
his [solution concept](/wiki/Solution\_concept "Solution concept") of [subgame
perfect equilibria](/wiki/Subgame\_perfect\_equilibrium "Subgame perfect
equilibrium"), which further refined the Nash equilibrium. Later he would
introduce [trembling hand perfection](/wiki/Trembling\_hand\_perfection
"Trembling hand perfection") as well. In 1994 Nash, Selten and
[Harsanyi](/wiki/John\_Harsanyi "John Harsanyi") became [Economics Nobel
Laureates](/wiki/Nobel\_Memorial\_Prize\_in\_Economic\_Sciences "Nobel Memorial
Prize in Economic Sciences") for their contributions to economic game theory.

In the 1970s, game theory was extensively applied in [biology](/wiki/Biology
"Biology"), largely as a result of the work of [John Maynard
Smith](/wiki/John\_Maynard\_Smith "John Maynard Smith") and his [evolutionarily
stable strategy](/wiki/Evolutionarily\_stable\_strategy "Evolutionarily stable
strategy"). In addition, the concepts of [correlated
equilibrium](/wiki/Correlated\_equilibrium "Correlated equilibrium"),
[trembling hand perfection](/wiki/Trembling\_hand\_perfect\_equilibrium
"Trembling hand perfect equilibrium") and [common
knowledge](/wiki/Common\_knowledge\_\(logic\) "Common knowledge \(logic\)")[a]
were introduced and analyzed.

In 1994, John Nash was awarded the Nobel Memorial Prize in the Economic
Sciences for his contribution to game theory. Nash's most famous contribution
to game theory is the concept of the Nash equilibrium, which is a solution
concept for [non-cooperative games](/wiki/Non-cooperative\_game\_theory "Non-
cooperative game theory"). A Nash equilibrium is a set of strategies, one for
each player, such that no player can improve their payoff by unilaterally
changing their strategy.

In 2005, game theorists [Thomas Schelling](/wiki/Thomas\_Schelling "Thomas
Schelling") and [Robert Aumann](/wiki/Robert\_Aumann "Robert Aumann") followed
Nash, Selten, and Harsanyi as Nobel Laureates. Schelling worked on dynamic
models, early examples of [evolutionary game
theory](/wiki/Evolutionary\_game\_theory "Evolutionary game theory"). Aumann
contributed more to the equilibrium school, introducing equilibrium coarsening
and correlated equilibria, and developing an extensive formal analysis of the
assumption of common knowledge and of its consequences.

In 2007, [Leonid Hurwicz](/wiki/Leonid\_Hurwicz "Leonid Hurwicz"), [Eric
Maskin](/wiki/Eric\_Maskin "Eric Maskin"), and [Roger
Myerson](/wiki/Roger\_Myerson "Roger Myerson") were awarded the Nobel Prize in
Economics "for having laid the foundations of [mechanism
design](/wiki/Mechanism\_design "Mechanism design") theory". Myerson's
contributions include the notion of [proper
equilibrium](/wiki/Proper\_equilibrium "Proper equilibrium"), and an important
graduate text: \_Game Theory, Analysis of Conflict\_.[1] Hurwicz introduced and
formalized the concept of [incentive
compatibility](/wiki/Incentive\_compatibility "Incentive compatibility").

In 2012, [Alvin E. Roth](/wiki/Alvin\_E.\_Roth "Alvin E. Roth") and [Lloyd S.
Shapley](/wiki/Lloyd\_Shapley "Lloyd Shapley") were awarded the Nobel Prize in
Economics "for the theory of stable allocations and the practice of market
design". In 2014, the Nobel went to game theorist [Jean
Tirole](/wiki/Jean\_Tirole "Jean Tirole").
