### Galileo
Galilei[[edit](/w/index.php?title=History\_of\_physics&action=edit&section=8
"Edit section: Galileo Galilei")]

Main article: [Galileo Galilei](/wiki/Galileo\_Galilei "Galileo Galilei")

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/cc/Galileo.arp.300pix.jpg/170px-
Galileo.arp.300pix.jpg)](/wiki/File:Galileo.arp.300pix.jpg)Galileo Galilei,
early proponent of the modern scientific worldview and method 
(1564–1642)

The Italian mathematician, astronomer, and physicist Galileo Galilei
(1564–1642) was a supporter of Copernicanism who made numerous astronomical
discoveries, carried out empirical experiments and improved the telescope. As
a mathematician, Galileo's role in the
[university](/wiki/History\_of\_European\_research\_universities "History of
European research universities") culture of his era was subordinated to the
three major topics of study: [law](/wiki/Law "Law"), [medicine](/wiki/Medicine
"Medicine"), and [theology](/wiki/Theology "Theology") (which was closely
allied to philosophy). Galileo, however, felt that the descriptive content of
the technical disciplines warranted philosophical interest, particularly
because mathematical analysis of astronomical observations – notably,
Copernicus' analysis of the [relative motions](/wiki/Relative\_motion "Relative
motion") of the Sun, Earth, Moon, and planets – indicated that philosophers'
statements about the nature of the universe could be shown to be in error.
Galileo also performed mechanical experiments, insisting that motion itself –
regardless of whether it was produced "naturally" or "artificially" (i.e.
deliberately) – had universally consistent characteristics that could be
described mathematically.

Galileo's early studies at the [University of Pisa](/wiki/University\_of\_Pisa
"University of Pisa") were in medicine, but he was soon drawn to mathematics
and physics. At 19, he discovered (and, [subsequently,
verified](/wiki/Galileo\_Galilei#Career\_as\_a\_scientist "Galileo Galilei")) the
[isochronal](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/isochronal "wikt:isochronal")
nature of the [pendulum](/wiki/Pendulum "Pendulum") when, using his pulse, he
timed the oscillations of a swinging lamp in [Pisa's
cathedral](/wiki/Piazza\_dei\_Miracoli "Piazza dei Miracoli") and found that it
remained the same for each swing regardless of the swing's
[amplitude](/wiki/Amplitude "Amplitude"). He soon became known through his
invention of a [hydrostatic balance](/wiki/Hydrostatic\_balance "Hydrostatic
balance") and for his treatise on the [center of
gravity](/wiki/Center\_of\_mass#Center\_of\_gravity "Center of mass") of solid
bodies. While teaching at the University of Pisa (1589–92), he initiated his
experiments concerning the laws of bodies in motion that brought results so
contradictory to the accepted teachings of Aristotle that strong antagonism
was aroused. He found that bodies do not fall with velocities
[proportional](/wiki/Proportionality\_\(mathematics\) "Proportionality
\(mathematics\)") to their weights. The story in which Galileo is said to have
[dropped weights from](/wiki/Galileo%27s\_Leaning\_Tower\_of\_Pisa\_experiment
"Galileo's Leaning Tower of Pisa experiment") the [Leaning Tower of
Pisa](/wiki/Leaning\_Tower\_of\_Pisa "Leaning Tower of Pisa") is apocryphal, but
he did find that the [path of a projectile](/wiki/Ballistic\_trajectory
"Ballistic trajectory") is a [parabola](/wiki/Parabola "Parabola") and is
credited with conclusions that anticipated [Newton's laws of
motion](/wiki/Newton%27s\_laws\_of\_motion "Newton's laws of motion") (e.g. the
notion of inertia). Among these is what is now called [Galilean
relativity](/wiki/Galilean\_relativity "Galilean relativity"), the first
precisely formulated statement about properties of space and time outside
[three-dimensional geometry](/wiki/Three-dimensional\_space "Three-dimensional
space").[\_[citation needed](/wiki/Wikipedia:Citation\_needed
"Wikipedia:Citation needed")\_]

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fe/Jupiter\_and\_the\_Galilean\_Satellites.jpg/220px-
Jupiter\_and\_the\_Galilean\_Satellites.jpg)](/wiki/File:Jupiter\_and\_the\_Galilean\_Satellites.jpg)A
composite montage comparing [Jupiter](/wiki/Jupiter "Jupiter") (lefthand side)
and its four [Galilean moons](/wiki/Galilean\_moons "Galilean moons") (top to
bottom: [Io](/wiki/Io\_\(moon\) "Io \(moon\)"), [Europa](/wiki/Europa\_\(moon\)
"Europa \(moon\)"), [Ganymede](/wiki/Ganymede\_\(moon\) "Ganymede \(moon\)"),
[Callisto](/wiki/Callisto\_\(moon\) "Callisto \(moon\)")).

Galileo has been called the "father of modern [observational
astronomy](/wiki/Observational\_astronomy "Observational astronomy")",[27] the
"father of modern physics", the "father of science",[28] and "the father of
[modern science](/wiki/Modern\_science "Modern science")".[29] According to
[Stephen Hawking](/wiki/Stephen\_Hawking "Stephen Hawking"), "Galileo, perhaps
more than any other single person, was responsible for the birth of modern
science."[30] As religious orthodoxy decreed a
[geocentric](/wiki/Geocentricism "Geocentricism") or
[Tychonic](/wiki/Tychonic\_system "Tychonic system") understanding of the Solar
system, Galileo's support for heliocentrism provoked controversy and he was
tried by the [Inquisition](/wiki/Inquisition "Inquisition"). Found "vehemently
suspect of heresy", he was forced to recant and spent the rest of his life
under house arrest.

The contributions that Galileo made to observational astronomy include the
telescopic confirmation of the [phases of Venus](/wiki/Phases\_of\_Venus "Phases
of Venus"); his discovery, in 1609, of [Jupiter's four largest
moons](/wiki/Moons\_of\_Jupiter "Moons of Jupiter") (subsequently given the
collective name of the "[Galilean moons](/wiki/Galilean\_moons "Galilean
moons")"); and the observation and analysis of [sunspots](/wiki/Sunspot
"Sunspot"). Galileo also pursued applied science and technology, inventing,
among other instruments, a military [compass](/wiki/Compass "Compass"). His
discovery of the Jovian moons [was published in 1610](/wiki/Sidereus\_Nuncius
"Sidereus Nuncius") and enabled him to obtain the position of mathematician
and philosopher to the [Medici](/wiki/Medici "Medici") court. As such, he was
expected to engage in debates with philosophers in the Aristotelian tradition
and received a large audience for his own publications such as the
\_[Discourses and Mathematical Demonstrations Concerning Two New
Sciences](/wiki/Two\_New\_Sciences "Two New Sciences")\_ (published abroad
following his arrest for the publication of \_[Dialogue Concerning the Two
Chief World Systems](/wiki/Dialogue\_Concerning\_the\_Two\_Chief\_World\_Systems
"Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems")\_) and \_[The
Assayer](/wiki/The\_Assayer "The Assayer")\_.[31][32] Galileo's interest in
experimenting with and formulating mathematical descriptions of motion
established experimentation as an integral part of natural philosophy. This
tradition, combining with the non-mathematical emphasis on the collection of
"experimental histories" by philosophical reformists such as [William
Gilbert](/wiki/William\_Gilbert\_\(astronomer\) "William Gilbert
\(astronomer\)") and [Francis Bacon](/wiki/Francis\_Bacon "Francis Bacon"),
drew a significant following in the years leading up to and following
Galileo's death, including [Evangelista
Torricelli](/wiki/Evangelista\_Torricelli "Evangelista Torricelli") and the
participants in the [Accademia del Cimento](/wiki/Accademia\_del\_Cimento
"Accademia del Cimento") in Italy; [Marin Mersenne](/wiki/Marin\_Mersenne
"Marin Mersenne") and [Blaise Pascal](/wiki/Blaise\_Pascal "Blaise Pascal") in
France; [Christiaan Huygens](/wiki/Christiaan\_Huygens "Christiaan Huygens") in
the Netherlands; and [Robert Hooke](/wiki/Robert\_Hooke "Robert Hooke") and
[Robert Boyle](/wiki/Robert\_Boyle "Robert Boyle") in England.
