## Lack of
evidence[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Conspiracy\_theory&action=edit&section=10
"Edit section: Lack of evidence")]

Belief in conspiracy theories is generally based not on evidence, but in the
faith of the believer.[79] [Noam Chomsky](/wiki/Noam\_Chomsky "Noam Chomsky")
contrasts conspiracy theory to [institutional
analysis](/wiki/Institutional\_analysis "Institutional analysis") which focuses
mostly on the public, long-term behavior of publicly known institutions, as
recorded in, for example, scholarly documents or [mainstream
media](/wiki/Mainstream\_media "Mainstream media") reports.[80] Conspiracy
theory conversely posits the existence of secretive coalitions of individuals
and speculates on their alleged activities.[81][82] Belief in conspiracy
theories is associated with biases in reasoning, such as the [conjunction
fallacy](/wiki/Conjunction\_fallacy "Conjunction fallacy").[83]

[Clare Birchall](/w/index.php?title=Clare\_Birchall&action=edit&redlink=1
"Clare Birchall \(page does not exist\)") at [King's College
London](/wiki/King%27s\_College\_London "King's College London") describes
conspiracy theory as a "form of popular knowledge or interpretation".[a] The
use of the word 'knowledge' here suggests ways in which conspiracy theory may
be considered in relation to legitimate modes of knowing.[b] The relationship
between legitimate and illegitimate knowledge, Birchall claims, is closer than
common dismissals of conspiracy theory contend.[85]

Theories involving multiple conspirators that are proven to be correct, such
as the [Watergate scandal](/wiki/Watergate\_scandal "Watergate scandal"), are
usually referred to as [investigative
journalism](/wiki/Investigative\_journalism "Investigative journalism") or
[historical analysis](/wiki/Historical\_analysis "Historical analysis") rather
than conspiracy theory.[86] Bjerg (2016) writes: "the way we normally use the
term conspiracy theory excludes instances where the theory has been generally
accepted as true. The Watergate scandal serves as the standard reference."[87]
By contrast, the term "Watergate conspiracy theory" is used to refer to a
variety of hypotheses in which those convicted in the conspiracy were in fact
the victims of a deeper conspiracy.[88] There are also attempts to analyze the
theory of conspiracy theories (conspiracy theory theory) to ensure that the
term "conspiracy theory" is used to refer to narratives that have been
debunked by experts, rather than as a generalized dismissal.[89]
