#### Condensed matter[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Physics&action=edit&section=23
"Edit section: Condensed matter")]

Main article: [Condensed matter physics](/wiki/Condensed\_matter\_physics
"Condensed matter physics")

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/af/Bose\_Einstein\_condensate.png/280px-
Bose\_Einstein\_condensate.png)](/wiki/File:Bose\_Einstein\_condensate.png)Velocity-
distribution data of a gas of [rubidium](/wiki/Rubidium "Rubidium") atoms,
confirming the discovery of a new phase of matter, the [Bose–Einstein
condensate](/wiki/Bose%E2%80%93Einstein\_condensate "Bose–Einstein condensate")

Condensed matter physics is the field of physics that deals with the
macroscopic physical properties of matter.[79][80] In particular, it is
concerned with the "condensed" [phases](/wiki/Phase\_\(matter\) "Phase
\(matter\)") that appear whenever the number of particles in a system is
extremely large and the interactions between them are strong.[81]

The most familiar examples of condensed phases are [solids](/wiki/Solid-
state\_physics "Solid-state physics") and liquids, which arise from the bonding
by way of the [electromagnetic force](/wiki/Electromagnetic\_force
"Electromagnetic force") between atoms.[82] More exotic condensed phases
include the [superfluid](/wiki/Superfluid "Superfluid")[83] and the
[Bose–Einstein condensate](/wiki/Bose%E2%80%93Einstein\_condensate
"Bose–Einstein condensate")[84] found in certain atomic systems at very low
temperature, the [superconducting](/wiki/Superconductivity
"Superconductivity") phase exhibited by [conduction
electrons](/wiki/Conduction\_electron "Conduction electron") in certain
materials,[85] and the [ferromagnetic](/wiki/Ferromagnet "Ferromagnet") and
[antiferromagnetic](/wiki/Antiferromagnet "Antiferromagnet") phases of
[spins](/wiki/Spin\_\(physics\) "Spin \(physics\)") on [atomic
lattices](/wiki/Crystal\_lattice "Crystal lattice").[86]

Condensed matter physics is the largest field of contemporary physics.
Historically, condensed matter physics grew out of solid-state physics, which
is now considered one of its main subfields.[87] The term \_condensed matter
physics\_ was apparently coined by [Philip
Anderson](/wiki/Philip\_Warren\_Anderson "Philip Warren Anderson") when he
renamed his research group—previously \_solid-state theory\_ —in 1967.[88] In
1978, the Division of Solid State Physics of the [American Physical
Society](/wiki/American\_Physical\_Society "American Physical Society") was
renamed as the Division of Condensed Matter Physics.[87] Condensed matter
physics has a large overlap with chemistry, [materials
science](/wiki/Materials\_science "Materials science"),
[nanotechnology](/wiki/Nanotechnology "Nanotechnology") and engineering.[81]
