### Role in Papuan cultures and semi-
domestication[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Cassowary&action=edit&section=13 "Edit
section: Role in Papuan cultures and semi-domestication")]

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/de/Coat\_of\_arms\_of\_West\_Papua.svg/200px-
Coat\_of\_arms\_of\_West\_Papua.svg.png)](/wiki/File:Coat\_of\_arms\_of\_West\_Papua.svg)The
cassowary is featured on the coat of arms of the [Indonesian
province](/wiki/Provinces\_of\_Indonesia "Provinces of Indonesia") of [West
Papua](/wiki/West\_Papua\_\(province\) "West Papua \(province\)")
[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/37/UvA-
BC\_300.273\_-\_Siboga\_-
\_de\_%22scheepsvogel%22\_Piet%2C\_een\_kasuaris%2C\_op\_het\_erf\_van\_de\_pasanggrahan\_op\_Saleyer.jpg/200px-
UvA-BC\_300.273\_-\_Siboga\_-
\_de\_%22scheepsvogel%22\_Piet%2C\_een\_kasuaris%2C\_op\_het\_erf\_van\_de\_pasanggrahan\_op\_Saleyer.jpg)](/wiki/File:UvA-
BC\_300.273\_-\_Siboga\_-
\_de\_%22scheepsvogel%22\_Piet,\_een\_kasuaris,\_op\_het\_erf\_van\_de\_pasanggrahan\_op\_Saleyer.jpg)Cassowary
held as a pet during the [Siboga Expedition](/wiki/Siboga\_Expedition "Siboga
Expedition") on Indonesia and New Guinea, 1899â€“1900

There is evidence that the cassowary may have been domesticated by humans
thousands of years before the chicken. Some New Guinea Highlands societies
capture cassowary chicks and raise them as semi-tame poultry, for use in
ceremonial gift exchanges and as food.[70][71] They are the only indigenous
Australasian animal known to have been partly domesticated by people prior to
European arrival and colonization and by definition, the oldest form of
domesticated animal and the largest domesticated bird.[72] The Maring people
of Kundagai sacrificed cassowaries (\_C. bennetti\_) in certain rituals.[73] The
Kalam people considered themselves related to cassowaries, and did not
classify them as birds, but as kin.[71] Consequently, they use the [Pandanus
register](/wiki/Pandanus\_language "Pandanus language") of the [Kalam
language](/wiki/Kalam\_language "Kalam language") when eating cassowary
meat.[74]

Studies on [Pleistocene](/wiki/Pleistocene "Pleistocene")/early
[Holocene](/wiki/Holocene "Holocene") cassowary remains in Papua suggest that
indigenous people at the time preferred to harvest eggs rather than adults.
They seem to have regulated their consumption of these birds, possibly even
collecting eggs and rearing young birds as one of the earliest forms of
domestication.[75]
