## Child development[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Theory-
theory&action=edit&section=1 "Edit section: Child development")]

Theory-theory states that children naturally attempt to construct theories to
explain their observations.[9] As all humans do, children seek to find
explanations that help them understand their surroundings. They learn through
their own experiences as well as through their observations of others' actions
and behaviors.[10]

Through their growth and development, children will continue to form intuitive
theories; revising and altering them as they come across new results and
observations.[10] Several developmentalists have conducted research of the
progression of their theories, mapping out when children start to form
theories about certain subjects, such as the biological and physical world,
social behaviors, and others' thoughts and minds ("[theory of
mind](/wiki/Theory\_of\_mind "Theory of mind")"), although there remains
controversies over when these shifts in theory-formation occur.[10]

As part of their investigative process, children often ask questions,
frequently posing "Why?" to adults, not seeking a technical and scientific
explanation but instead seeking to investigate the relation of the concept in
question to themselves, as part of their egocentric view.[9] In a study where
Mexican-American mothers were interviewed over a two-week period about the
types of questions their preschool children ask, researchers discovered that
the children asked their parents more about biology and social behaviors
rather than nonliving objects and artifacts.[11] In their questions, the
children were mostly ambiguous, unclear if they desired an explanation of
purpose or cause.[11] Although parents will usually answer with a causal
explanation, some children found the answers and explanations inadequate for
their understanding, and as a result, they begin to create their own theories,
particularly evident in children's understanding of religion.[9]

This theory also plays a part in Vygotsky's [social learning
theory](/wiki/Social\_learning\_theory "Social learning theory"), also called
[modeling](/wiki/Modeling\_\(psychology\) "Modeling \(psychology\)"). Vygotsky
claims that humans, as social beings, learn and develop by observing others'
behavior and imitating them.[9] In this process of social learning, prior to
imitation, children will first post inquiries and investigate why adults act
and behave in a particular way. Afterwards, if the adult succeeds at the task,
the child will likely copy the adult, but if the adult fails, the child will
choose not to follow the example.[9]
