### Use of game theory in project
management[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Game\_theory&action=edit&section=31 "Edit
section: Use of game theory in project management")]

Sensible decision-making is critical for the success of projects. In project
management, game theory is used to model the decision-making process of
players, such as investors, project managers, contractors, sub-contractors,
governments and customers. Quite often, these players have competing
interests, and sometimes their interests are directly detrimental to other
players, making project management scenarios well-suited to be modeled by game
theory.

Piraveenan (2019)[112] in his review provides several examples where game
theory is used to model project management scenarios. For instance, an
investor typically has several investment options, and each option will likely
result in a different project, and thus one of the investment options has to
be chosen before the project charter can be produced. Similarly, any large
project involving subcontractors, for instance, a construction project, has a
complex interplay between the main contractor (the project manager) and
subcontractors, or among the subcontractors themselves, which typically has
several decision points. For example, if there is an ambiguity in the contract
between the contractor and subcontractor, each must decide how hard to push
their case without jeopardizing the whole project, and thus their own stake in
it. Similarly, when projects from competing organizations are launched, the
marketing personnel have to decide what is the best timing and strategy to
market the project, or its resultant product or service, so that it can gain
maximum traction in the face of competition. In each of these scenarios, the
required decisions depend on the decisions of other players who, in some way,
have competing interests to the interests of the decision-maker, and thus can
ideally be modeled using game theory.

Piraveenan[112] summarises that two-player games are predominantly used to
model project management scenarios, and based on the identity of these
players, five distinct types of games are used in project management.

 \* Government-sector–private-sector games (games that model [public–private partnerships](/wiki/Public%E2%80%93private\_partnership "Public–private partnership"))
 \* Contractor–contractor games
 \* Contractor–subcontractor games
 \* Subcontractor–subcontractor games
 \* Games involving other players

In terms of types of games, both cooperative as well as non-cooperative,
normal-form as well as extensive-form, and zero-sum as well as non-zero-sum
are used to model various project management scenarios.
