### First superstring
revolution[[edit](/w/index.php?title=String\_theory&action=edit&section=26
"Edit section: First superstring revolution")]

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/97/Edward\_Witten.jpg/170px-
Edward\_Witten.jpg)](/wiki/File:Edward\_Witten.jpg)[Edward
Witten](/wiki/Edward\_Witten "Edward Witten")

In the early 1980s, [Edward Witten](/wiki/Edward\_Witten "Edward Witten")
discovered that most theories of quantum gravity could not accommodate
[chiral](/wiki/Chirality\_\(physics\) "Chirality \(physics\)") fermions like
the neutrino. This led him, in collaboration with [Luis Álvarez-
Gaumé](/wiki/Luis\_%C3%81lvarez-Gaum%C3%A9 "Luis Álvarez-Gaumé"), to study
violations of the conservation laws in gravity theories with
[anomalies](/wiki/Gravitational\_anomaly "Gravitational anomaly"), concluding
that type I string theories were inconsistent. Green and Schwarz discovered a
contribution to the anomaly that Witten and Alvarez-Gaumé had missed, which
restricted the gauge group of the type I string theory to be SO(32). In coming
to understand this calculation, Edward Witten became convinced that string
theory was truly a consistent theory of gravity, and he became a high-profile
advocate. Following Witten's lead, between 1984 and 1986, hundreds of
physicists started to work in this field, and this is sometimes called the
[first superstring revolution](/wiki/First\_superstring\_revolution "First
superstring revolution").[\_[citation needed](/wiki/Wikipedia:Citation\_needed
"Wikipedia:Citation needed")\_]

During this period, [David Gross](/wiki/David\_Gross "David Gross"), [Jeffrey
Harvey](/wiki/Jeffrey\_A.\_Harvey "Jeffrey A. Harvey"), [Emil
Martinec](/wiki/Emil\_Martinec "Emil Martinec"), and [Ryan
Rohm](/wiki/Ryan\_Rohm "Ryan Rohm") discovered [heterotic
strings](/wiki/Heterotic\_strings "Heterotic strings"). The gauge group of
these closed strings was two copies of [E8](/wiki/E8\_\(mathematics\) "E8
\(mathematics\)"), and either copy could easily and naturally include the
standard model. [Philip Candelas](/wiki/Philip\_Candelas "Philip Candelas"),
[Gary Horowitz](/wiki/Gary\_Horowitz "Gary Horowitz"), [Andrew
Strominger](/wiki/Andrew\_Strominger "Andrew Strominger") and Edward Witten
found that the Calabi–Yau manifolds are the compactifications that preserve a
realistic amount of supersymmetry, while [Lance Dixon](/wiki/Lance\_Dixon
"Lance Dixon") and others worked out the physical properties of
[orbifolds](/wiki/Orbifolds "Orbifolds"), distinctive geometrical
singularities allowed in string theory. [Cumrun Vafa](/wiki/Cumrun\_Vafa
"Cumrun Vafa") generalized T-duality from circles to arbitrary manifolds,
creating the mathematical field of [mirror
symmetry](/wiki/Mirror\_symmetry\_\(string\_theory\) "Mirror symmetry \(string
theory\)"). [Daniel Friedan](/wiki/Daniel\_Friedan "Daniel Friedan"), [Emil
Martinec](/wiki/Emil\_Martinec "Emil Martinec") and [Stephen
Shenker](/wiki/Stephen\_Shenker "Stephen Shenker") further developed the
covariant quantization of the superstring using conformal field theory
techniques. [David Gross](/wiki/David\_Gross "David Gross") and Vipul Periwal
discovered that string perturbation theory was divergent. [Stephen
Shenker](/wiki/Stephen\_Shenker "Stephen Shenker") showed it diverged much
faster than in field theory suggesting that new non-perturbative objects were
missing.[\_[citation needed](/wiki/Wikipedia:Citation\_needed
"Wikipedia:Citation needed")\_]

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/cf/Joseph\_Polchinski.jpg/170px-
Joseph\_Polchinski.jpg)](/wiki/File:Joseph\_Polchinski.jpg)[Joseph
Polchinski](/wiki/Joseph\_Polchinski "Joseph Polchinski")

In the 1990s, [Joseph Polchinski](/wiki/Joseph\_Polchinski "Joseph Polchinski")
discovered that the theory requires higher-dimensional objects, called
[D-branes](/wiki/D-brane "D-brane") and identified these with the black-hole
solutions of supergravity. These were understood to be the new objects
suggested by the perturbative divergences, and they opened up a new field with
rich mathematical structure. It quickly became clear that D-branes and other
p-branes, not just strings, formed the matter content of the string theories,
and the physical interpretation of the strings and branes was revealed—they
are a type of black hole. [Leonard Susskind](/wiki/Leonard\_Susskind "Leonard
Susskind") had incorporated the [holographic
principle](/wiki/Holographic\_principle "Holographic principle") of [Gerardus
't Hooft](/wiki/Gerardus\_%27t\_Hooft "Gerardus 't Hooft") into string theory,
identifying the long highly excited string states with ordinary thermal black
hole states. As suggested by 't Hooft, the fluctuations of the black hole
horizon, the world-sheet or world-volume theory, describes not only the
degrees of freedom of the black hole, but all nearby objects too.
