### Special relativity and
electrodynamics[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Quantum\_mechanics&action=edit&section=16
"Edit section: Special relativity and electrodynamics")]

Early attempts to merge quantum mechanics with [special
relativity](/wiki/Special\_relativity "Special relativity") involved the
replacement of the Schrödinger equation with a covariant equation such as the
[Klein–Gordon equation](/wiki/Klein%E2%80%93Gordon\_equation "Klein–Gordon
equation") or the [Dirac equation](/wiki/Dirac\_equation "Dirac equation").
While these theories were successful in explaining many experimental results,
they had certain unsatisfactory qualities stemming from their neglect of the
relativistic creation and annihilation of particles. A fully relativistic
quantum theory required the development of quantum field theory, which applies
quantization to a field (rather than a fixed set of particles). The first
complete quantum field theory, [quantum
electrodynamics](/wiki/Quantum\_electrodynamics "Quantum electrodynamics"),
provides a fully quantum description of the [electromagnetic
interaction](/wiki/Electromagnetism "Electromagnetism"). Quantum
electrodynamics is, along with [general relativity](/wiki/General\_relativity
"General relativity"), one of the most accurate physical theories ever
devised.[44][45]

The full apparatus of quantum field theory is often unnecessary for describing
electrodynamic systems. A simpler approach, one that has been used since the
inception of quantum mechanics, is to treat [charged](/wiki/Electric\_charge
"Electric charge") particles as quantum mechanical objects being acted on by a
classical [electromagnetic field](/wiki/Electromagnetic\_field "Electromagnetic
field"). For example, the elementary quantum model of the [hydrogen
atom](/wiki/Hydrogen\_atom "Hydrogen atom") describes the [electric
field](/wiki/Electric\_field "Electric field") of the hydrogen atom using a
classical − e 2 / ( 4 π ϵ 0 r ) {\displaystyle \textstyle -e^{2}/(4\pi
\epsilon \_{\_{0}}r)} ![{\\displaystyle \\textstyle -e^{2}/\(4\\pi \\epsilon
\_{\_{0}}r\)}](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest\_v1/media/math/render/svg/7c4876353362da0a234af137590c6379d8f8c273)
[Coulomb potential](/wiki/Electric\_potential "Electric potential").[7]: 285
Likewise, in a [Stern–Gerlach
experiment](/wiki/Stern%E2%80%93Gerlach\_experiment "Stern–Gerlach
experiment"), a charged particle is modeled as a quantum system, while the
background magnetic field is described classically.[41]: 26 This "semi-
classical" approach fails if quantum fluctuations in the electromagnetic field
play an important role, such as in the emission of photons by [charged
particles](/wiki/Charged\_particle "Charged particle").

[Quantum field](/wiki/Field\_\(physics\) "Field \(physics\)") theories for the
[strong nuclear force](/wiki/Strong\_nuclear\_force "Strong nuclear force") and
the [weak nuclear force](/wiki/Weak\_nuclear\_force "Weak nuclear force") have
also been developed. The quantum field theory of the strong nuclear force is
called [quantum chromodynamics](/wiki/Quantum\_chromodynamics "Quantum
chromodynamics"), and describes the interactions of subnuclear particles such
as [quarks](/wiki/Quark "Quark") and [gluons](/wiki/Gluon "Gluon"). The weak
nuclear force and the electromagnetic force were unified, in their quantized
forms, into a single quantum field theory (known as [electroweak
theory](/wiki/Electroweak\_theory "Electroweak theory")), by the physicists
[Abdus Salam](/wiki/Abdus\_Salam "Abdus Salam"), [Sheldon
Glashow](/wiki/Sheldon\_Glashow "Sheldon Glashow") and [Steven
Weinberg](/wiki/Steven\_Weinberg "Steven Weinberg").[46]
