### Greek
concept[[edit](/w/index.php?title=History\_of\_physics&action=edit&section=2
"Edit section: Greek concept")]

The move towards a rational understanding of nature began at least since the
[Archaic period](/wiki/Archaic\_Greece "Archaic Greece") in Greece (650–480
[BCE](/wiki/BCE "BCE")) with the [Pre-Socratic
philosophers](/wiki/Presocratics "Presocratics"). The philosopher [Thales of
Miletus](/wiki/Thales\_of\_Miletus "Thales of Miletus") (7th and 6th centuries
BCE), dubbed "the Father of Science" for refusing to accept various
supernatural, religious or mythological explanations for natural
[phenomena](/wiki/Phenomenon "Phenomenon"), proclaimed that every event had a
natural cause.[1] Thales also made advancements in 580 BCE by suggesting that
water is [the basic element](/wiki/Arche "Arche"), experimenting with the
attraction between [magnets](/wiki/Magnet "Magnet") and rubbed
[amber](/wiki/Amber "Amber") and formulating the first recorded
[cosmologies](/wiki/Cosmology "Cosmology"). [Anaximander](/wiki/Anaximander
"Anaximander"), developer of a proto-[evolutionary](/wiki/Evolution
"Evolution") theory, disputed Thales' ideas and proposed that rather than
water, a substance called \_[apeiron](/wiki/Apeiron\_\(cosmology\) "Apeiron
\(cosmology\)")\_ was the building block of all matter. Around 500 BCE,
[Heraclitus](/wiki/Heraclitus "Heraclitus") proposed that the only basic law
governing the [Universe](/wiki/Universe "Universe") was the principle of
change and that nothing remains in the same state indefinitely. Along with his
contemporary [Parmenides](/wiki/Parmenides "Parmenides") were among the first
scholars in ancient physics to contemplate on the role of [time](/wiki/Time
"Time") in the universe, a key concept that is still [an issue in modern
physics](/wiki/Problem\_of\_time "Problem of time").

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/ae/Aristotle\_Altemps\_Inv8575.jpg/170px-
Aristotle\_Altemps\_Inv8575.jpg)](/wiki/File:Aristotle\_Altemps\_Inv8575.jpg)[Aristotle](/wiki/Aristotle
"Aristotle") 
(384–322 [BCE](/wiki/BCE "BCE"))

During the [classical period](/wiki/Classical\_Greece "Classical Greece") in
Greece (6th, 5th and 4th centuries BCE) and in [Hellenistic
times](/wiki/Hellenistic\_civilization "Hellenistic civilization"), [natural
philosophy](/wiki/Natural\_philosophy "Natural philosophy") slowly developed
into an exciting and contentious field of study. [Aristotle](/wiki/Aristotle
"Aristotle") ([Greek](/wiki/Greek\_language "Greek language"): Ἀριστοτέλης,
\_Aristotélēs\_) (384–322 BCE), a student of [Plato](/wiki/Plato "Plato"),
promoted the concept that observation of physical phenomena could ultimately
lead to the discovery of the natural laws governing them.[\_[citation
needed](/wiki/Wikipedia:Citation\_needed "Wikipedia:Citation needed")\_]
Aristotle's writings cover physics, [metaphysics](/wiki/Metaphysics
"Metaphysics"), [poetry](/wiki/Poetry "Poetry"), [theater](/wiki/Theater
"Theater"), [music](/wiki/Music "Music"), [logic](/wiki/Logic "Logic"),
[rhetoric](/wiki/Rhetoric "Rhetoric"), [linguistics](/wiki/Linguistics
"Linguistics"), [politics](/wiki/Politics "Politics"),
[government](/wiki/Forms\_of\_government "Forms of government"),
[ethics](/wiki/Ethics "Ethics"), [biology](/wiki/Biology "Biology") and
[zoology](/wiki/Zoology "Zoology"). He wrote the first work which refers to
that line of study as "Physics" – in the 4th century BCE, Aristotle founded
the system known as [Aristotelian physics](/wiki/Aristotelian\_physics
"Aristotelian physics"). He attempted to explain ideas such as
[motion](/wiki/Motion\_\(physics\) "Motion \(physics\)") (and
[gravity](/wiki/Gravity "Gravity")) with the theory of [four
elements](/wiki/Classical\_elements "Classical elements"). Aristotle believed
that all matter was made up of aether, or some combination of four elements:
earth, water, air, and fire. According to Aristotle, these four terrestrial
elements are capable of inter-transformation and move toward their natural
place, so a stone falls downward toward the center of the cosmos, but flames
rise upward toward the [circumference](/wiki/Circumference "Circumference").
Eventually, [Aristotelian physics](/wiki/Aristotelian\_physics "Aristotelian
physics") became enormously popular for many centuries in Europe, informing
the scientific and scholastic developments of the [Middle
Ages](/wiki/Middle\_Ages "Middle Ages"). It remained the mainstream scientific
paradigm in Europe until the time of [Galileo Galilei](/wiki/Galileo\_Galilei
"Galileo Galilei") and [Isaac Newton](/wiki/Isaac\_Newton "Isaac Newton").

Early in Classical Greece, knowledge that the Earth is
[spherical](/wiki/Sphere "Sphere") ("round") was common. Around 240 BCE, as
the result of [a seminal
experiment](/wiki/Eratosthenes#Measurement\_of\_Earth's\_circumference
"Eratosthenes"), [Eratosthenes](/wiki/Eratosthenes "Eratosthenes") (276–194
BCE) accurately estimated its circumference. In contrast to Aristotle's
geocentric views, [Aristarchus of Samos](/wiki/Aristarchus\_of\_Samos
"Aristarchus of Samos") ([Greek](/wiki/Greek\_language "Greek language"):
Ἀρίσταρχος; c. 310 – c. 230 BCE) presented an explicit argument for a
[heliocentric model](/wiki/Heliocentrism "Heliocentrism") of the [Solar
System](/wiki/Solar\_System "Solar System"), i.e. for placing the
[Sun](/wiki/Sun "Sun"), not the [Earth](/wiki/Earth "Earth"), at its centre.
[Seleucus of Seleucia](/wiki/Seleucus\_of\_Seleucia "Seleucus of Seleucia"), a
follower of Aristarchus' heliocentric theory, stated that [the Earth rotated
around its own axis](/wiki/Axial\_tilt "Axial tilt"), which, in turn, [revolved
around](/wiki/Orbit "Orbit") the Sun. Though the arguments he used were lost,
[Plutarch](/wiki/Plutarch "Plutarch") stated that Seleucus was the first to
prove the heliocentric system through reasoning.

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/e7/Domenico-
Fetti\_Archimedes\_1620.jpg/180px-Domenico-
Fetti\_Archimedes\_1620.jpg)](/wiki/File:Domenico-Fetti\_Archimedes\_1620.jpg)The
ancient Greek mathematician [Archimedes](/wiki/Archimedes "Archimedes"),
developer of ideas regarding [fluid mechanics](/wiki/Fluid\_mechanics "Fluid
mechanics") and [buoyancy](/wiki/Buoyancy "Buoyancy").

In the 3rd century BCE, the [Greek mathematician](/wiki/Greek\_mathematics
"Greek mathematics") Archimedes of Syracuse ([Greek](/wiki/Greek\_language
"Greek language"):
[Ἀρχιμήδης](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/%E1%BC%88%CF%81%CF%87%CE%B9%CE%BC%CE%AE%CE%B4%CE%B7%CF%82
"wikt:Ἀρχιμήδης") (287–212 BCE) – generally considered to be the greatest
mathematician of antiquity and one of the greatest of all time – laid the
foundations of [hydrostatics](/wiki/Fluid\_statics "Fluid statics"),
[statics](/wiki/Statics "Statics") and calculated the underlying mathematics
of the [lever](/wiki/Lever "Lever"). A leading scientist of classical
antiquity, Archimedes also developed elaborate systems of pulleys to move
large objects with a minimum of effort. The [Archimedes'
screw](/wiki/Archimedes%27\_screw "Archimedes' screw") underpins modern
hydroengineering, and his machines of war helped to hold back the armies of
Rome in the [First Punic War](/wiki/First\_Punic\_War "First Punic War").
Archimedes even tore apart the arguments of Aristotle and his metaphysics,
pointing out that it was impossible to separate mathematics and nature and
proved it by converting mathematical theories into practical inventions.
Furthermore, in his work \_[On Floating Bodies](/wiki/On\_Floating\_Bodies "On
Floating Bodies")\_ , around 250 BCE, Archimedes developed the law of
[buoyancy](/wiki/Buoyancy "Buoyancy"), also known as [Archimedes'
principle](/wiki/Archimedes%27\_principle "Archimedes' principle"). In
mathematics, Archimedes used the method of exhaustion to calculate the area
under the arc of a [parabola](/wiki/Parabola "Parabola") with the summation of
an infinite series, and gave a remarkably accurate approximation of
[pi](/wiki/Pi "Pi"). He also defined the [spiral bearing his
name](/wiki/Archimedean\_spiral "Archimedean spiral"), formulae for the
[volumes](/wiki/Volume "Volume") of surfaces of revolution and an ingenious
system for expressing very large numbers. He also developed the principles of
equilibrium states and [centers of gravity](/wiki/Center\_of\_mass "Center of
mass"), ideas that would influence future scholars like Galileo, and Newton.

[Hipparchus](/wiki/Hipparchus "Hipparchus") (190–120 BCE), focusing on
astronomy and mathematics, used sophisticated geometrical techniques to map
the motion of the stars and [planets](/wiki/Planet "Planet"), even predicting
the times that [Solar eclipses](/wiki/Solar\_eclipse "Solar eclipse") would
happen. He added calculations of the distance of the Sun and Moon from the
Earth, based upon his improvements to the observational instruments used at
that time. Another of the early physicists was [Ptolemy](/wiki/Ptolemy
"Ptolemy") (90–168 CE), one of the leading minds during the time of the [Roman
Empire](/wiki/Roman\_Empire "Roman Empire"). Ptolemy was the author of several
scientific treatises, at least three of which were of continuing importance to
later Islamic and European science. The first is the astronomical treatise now
known as the \_[Almagest](/wiki/Almagest "Almagest")\_ (in Greek, Ἡ Μεγάλη
Σύνταξις, "The Great Treatise", originally Μαθηματικὴ Σύνταξις, "Mathematical
Treatise"). The second is the \_[Geography](/wiki/Geography\_\(Ptolemy\)
"Geography \(Ptolemy\)")\_ , which is a thorough discussion of the geographic
knowledge of the [Greco-Roman world](/wiki/Greco-Roman\_world "Greco-Roman
world").

Much of the accumulated knowledge of the ancient world was lost. Even of the
works of the many respectable thinkers, few fragments survived. Although he
wrote at least fourteen books, almost nothing of Hipparchus' direct work
survived. Of the 150 reputed [Aristotelian](/wiki/Aristotelianism
"Aristotelianism") works, only 30 exist, and some of those are "little more
than lecture notes".[\_[according to
whom?](/wiki/Wikipedia:Manual\_of\_Style/Words\_to\_watch#Unsupported\_attributions
"Wikipedia:Manual of Style/Words to watch")\_]
