### Dualities[[edit](/w/index.php?title=String\_theory&action=edit&section=5
"Edit section: Dualities")]

[![A diagram indicating the relationships between M-theory and the five
superstring
theories.](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/03/Dualities\_in\_String\_Theory.svg/450px-
Dualities\_in\_String\_Theory.svg.png)](/wiki/File:Dualities\_in\_String\_Theory.svg)A
diagram of string theory dualities. Blue edges indicate
[S-duality](/wiki/S-duality "S-duality"). Red edges indicate
[T-duality](/wiki/T-duality "T-duality").

Main articles: [S-duality](/wiki/S-duality "S-duality") and
[T-duality](/wiki/T-duality "T-duality")

A notable fact about string theory is that the different versions of the
theory all turn out to be related in highly nontrivial ways. One of the
relationships that can exist between different string theories is called
[S-duality](/wiki/S-duality "S-duality"). This is a relationship that says
that a collection of strongly interacting particles in one theory can, in some
cases, be viewed as a collection of weakly interacting particles in a
completely different theory. Roughly speaking, a collection of particles is
said to be strongly interacting if they combine and decay often and weakly
interacting if they do so infrequently. Type I string theory turns out to be
equivalent by S-duality to the \_SO\_(32) heterotic string theory. Similarly,
type IIB string theory is related to itself in a nontrivial way by
S-duality.[25]

Another relationship between different string theories is
[T-duality](/wiki/T-duality "T-duality"). Here one considers strings
propagating around a circular extra dimension. T-duality states that a string
propagating around a circle of radius \_R\_ is equivalent to a string
propagating around a circle of radius 1/\_R\_ in the sense that all observable
quantities in one description are identified with quantities in the dual
description. For example, a string has [momentum](/wiki/Momentum "Momentum")
as it propagates around a circle, and it can also wind around the circle one
or more times. The number of times the string winds around a circle is called
the [winding number](/wiki/Winding\_number "Winding number"). If a string has
momentum \_p\_ and winding number \_n\_ in one description, it will have momentum
\_n\_ and winding number \_p\_ in the dual description. For example, type IIA
string theory is equivalent to type IIB string theory via T-duality, and the
two versions of heterotic string theory are also related by T-duality.[25]

In general, the term \_duality\_ refers to a situation where two seemingly
different [physical systems](/wiki/Physical\_system "Physical system") turn out
to be equivalent in a nontrivial way. Two theories related by a duality need
not be string theories. For example, [Montonen–Olive
duality](/wiki/Montonen%E2%80%93Olive\_duality "Montonen–Olive duality") is an
example of an S-duality relationship between quantum field theories. The
AdS/CFT correspondence is an example of a duality that relates string theory
to a quantum field theory. If two theories are related by a duality, it means
that one theory can be transformed in some way so that it ends up looking just
like the other theory. The two theories are then said to be \_dual\_ to one
another under the transformation. Put differently, the two theories are
mathematically different descriptions of the same phenomena.[26]
