### Matrix
theory[[edit](/w/index.php?title=String\_theory&action=edit&section=9 "Edit
section: Matrix theory")]

Main article: [Matrix theory (physics)](/wiki/Matrix\_theory\_\(physics\)
"Matrix theory \(physics\)")

In mathematics, a [matrix](/wiki/Matrix\_\(mathematics\) "Matrix
\(mathematics\)") is a rectangular array of numbers or other data. In physics,
a [matrix model](/wiki/Matrix\_theory\_\(physics\) "Matrix theory \(physics\)")
is a particular kind of physical theory whose mathematical formulation
involves the notion of a matrix in an important way. A matrix model describes
the behavior of a set of matrices within the framework of quantum
mechanics.[48]

One important example of a matrix model is the BFSS matrix model proposed by
[Tom Banks](/wiki/Tom\_Banks\_\(physicist\) "Tom Banks \(physicist\)"), [Willy
Fischler](/wiki/Willy\_Fischler "Willy Fischler"), [Stephen
Shenker](/wiki/Stephen\_Shenker "Stephen Shenker"), and [Leonard
Susskind](/wiki/Leonard\_Susskind "Leonard Susskind") in 1997. This theory
describes the behavior of a set of nine large matrices. In their original
paper, these authors showed, among other things, that the low energy limit of
this matrix model is described by eleven-dimensional supergravity. These
calculations led them to propose that the BFSS matrix model is exactly
equivalent to M-theory. The BFSS matrix model can therefore be used as a
prototype for a correct formulation of M-theory and a tool for investigating
the properties of M-theory in a relatively simple setting.[48]

The development of the matrix model formulation of M-theory has led physicists
to consider various connections between string theory and a branch of
mathematics called [noncommutative geometry](/wiki/Noncommutative\_geometry
"Noncommutative geometry"). This subject is a generalization of ordinary
geometry in which mathematicians define new geometric notions using tools from
[noncommutative algebra](/wiki/Noncommutative\_algebra "Noncommutative
algebra").[49] In a paper from 1998, [Alain Connes](/wiki/Alain\_Connes "Alain
Connes"), [Michael R. Douglas](/wiki/Michael\_R.\_Douglas "Michael R. Douglas"),
and [Albert Schwarz](/wiki/Albert\_Schwarz "Albert Schwarz") showed that some
aspects of matrix models and M-theory are described by a [noncommutative
quantum field theory](/wiki/Noncommutative\_quantum\_field\_theory
"Noncommutative quantum field theory"), a special kind of physical theory in
which spacetime is described mathematically using noncommutative geometry.[50]
This established a link between matrix models and M-theory on the one hand,
and noncommutative geometry on the other hand. It quickly led to the discovery
of other important links between noncommutative geometry and various physical
theories.[51][52]
