### Political
science[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Game\_theory&action=edit&section=32 "Edit
section: Political science")]

[Conflict resolution](/wiki/Conflict\_resolution "Conflict resolution") 
--- 
[Nonviolence](/wiki/Nonviolence "Nonviolence") 
 
 \* [Arbitration](/wiki/Arbitration "Arbitration")
 \* [Auction](/wiki/Auction "Auction")
 \* [Conciliation](/wiki/Conciliation "Conciliation")
 \* [Law](/wiki/Law "Law")
 \* [Dispute resolution](/wiki/Dispute\_resolution "Dispute resolution")
 \* [Rule of law](/wiki/Rule\_of\_law "Rule of law")
 \* [Collaborative](/wiki/Collaborative\_law "Collaborative law")
 \* [Mediation](/wiki/Mediation "Mediation")
 \* [Party-directed](/wiki/Party-directed\_mediation "Party-directed mediation")
 \* [Negotiation](/wiki/Negotiation "Negotiation")

 
[Violence](/wiki/Violence "Violence") 
 
 \* [Conflict escalation](/wiki/Conflict\_escalation "Conflict escalation")
 \* [De-escalation](/wiki/De-escalation "De-escalation")
 \* [Just war theory](/wiki/Just\_war\_theory "Just war theory")
 \* [War](/wiki/War "War")
 \* [studies](/wiki/War\_studies "War studies")

 
[International relations](/wiki/International\_relations "International
relations") 
 
 \* [Appeasement](/wiki/Appeasement "Appeasement")
 \* [Brinkmanship](/wiki/Brinkmanship "Brinkmanship")
 \* [Diplomacy](/wiki/Diplomacy "Diplomacy")
 \* [Deterrence](/wiki/Deterrence\_theory "Deterrence theory")

 
Workplace 
 
 \* [Conflict management](/wiki/Conflict\_management "Conflict management")

 
Other 
 
 \* [Democracy](/wiki/Democracy "Democracy")
 \* Game theory
 \* [Prisoner's dilemma](/wiki/Prisoner%27s\_dilemma "Prisoner's dilemma")
 \* [Paradox of tolerance](/wiki/Paradox\_of\_tolerance "Paradox of tolerance")
 \* [Rule of man](/wiki/Rule\_of\_man "Rule of man")

 
 
 \* [v](/wiki/Template:Conflict\_resolution\_sidebar "Template:Conflict resolution sidebar")
 \* [t](/wiki/Template\_talk:Conflict\_resolution\_sidebar "Template talk:Conflict resolution sidebar")
 \* [e](/wiki/Special:EditPage/Template:Conflict\_resolution\_sidebar "Special:EditPage/Template:Conflict resolution sidebar")

 
 
The application of game theory to [political science](/wiki/Political\_science
"Political science") is focused in the overlapping areas of [fair
division](/wiki/Fair\_division "Fair division"), [political
economy](/wiki/Political\_economy "Political economy"), [public
choice](/wiki/Public\_choice "Public choice"), [war
bargaining](/wiki/War%27s\_inefficiency\_puzzle "War's inefficiency puzzle"),
[positive political theory](/wiki/Positive\_political\_theory "Positive
political theory"), and [social choice theory](/wiki/Social\_choice\_theory
"Social choice theory"). In each of these areas, researchers have developed
game-theoretic models in which the players are often voters, states, special
interest groups, and politicians.[113]

Early examples of game theory applied to political science are provided by
[Anthony Downs](/wiki/Anthony\_Downs "Anthony Downs"). In his 1957 book \_[An
Economic Theory of Democracy](/wiki/An\_Economic\_Theory\_of\_Democracy "An
Economic Theory of Democracy")\_ ,[114] he applies the [Hotelling firm location
model](/wiki/Hotelling%27s\_law "Hotelling's law") to the political process. In
the Downsian model, political candidates commit to ideologies on a one-
dimensional policy space. Downs first shows how the political candidates will
converge to the ideology preferred by the median voter if voters are fully
informed, but then argues that voters choose to remain rationally ignorant
which allows for candidate divergence. Game theory was applied in 1962 to the
[Cuban Missile Crisis](/wiki/Cuban\_Missile\_Crisis "Cuban Missile Crisis")
during the presidency of John F. Kennedy.[115]

It has also been proposed that game theory explains the stability of any form
of political government. Taking the simplest case of a monarchy, for example,
the king, being only one person, does not and cannot maintain his authority by
personally exercising physical control over all or even any significant number
of his subjects. Sovereign control is instead explained by the recognition by
each citizen that all other citizens expect each other to view the king (or
other established government) as the person whose orders will be followed.
Coordinating communication among citizens to replace the sovereign is
effectively barred, since conspiracy to replace the sovereign is generally
punishable as a crime.[116] Thus, in a process that can be modeled by variants
of the prisoner's dilemma, during periods of stability no citizen will find it
rational to move to replace the sovereign, even if all the citizens know they
would be better off if they were all to act collectively.[117]

A game-theoretic explanation for [democratic
peace](/wiki/Democratic\_peace\_theory "Democratic peace theory") is that public
and open debate in democracies sends clear and reliable information regarding
their intentions to other states. In contrast, it is difficult to know the
intentions of nondemocratic leaders, what effect concessions will have, and if
promises will be kept. Thus there will be mistrust and unwillingness to make
concessions if at least one of the parties in a dispute is a non-
democracy.[118]

However, game theory predicts that two countries may still go to war even if
their leaders are cognizant of the costs of fighting. War may result from
asymmetric information; two countries may have incentives to mis-represent the
amount of military resources they have on hand, rendering them unable to
settle disputes agreeably without resorting to fighting. Moreover, war may
arise because of commitment problems: if two countries wish to settle a
dispute via peaceful means, but each wishes to go back on the terms of that
settlement, they may have no choice but to resort to warfare. Finally, war may
result from issue indivisibilities.[119]

Game theory could also help predict a nation's responses when there is a new
rule or law to be applied to that nation. One example is Peter John Wood's
(2013) research looking into what nations could do to help reduce climate
change. Wood thought this could be accomplished by making treaties with other
nations to reduce [greenhouse gas emissions](/wiki/Greenhouse\_gas\_emissions
"Greenhouse gas emissions"). However, he concluded that this idea could not
work because it would create a prisoner's dilemma for the nations.[120]
