### Computer science and
logic[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Game\_theory&action=edit&section=35 "Edit
section: Computer science and logic")]

Game theory has come to play an increasingly important role in
[logic](/wiki/Logic "Logic") and in [computer science](/wiki/Computer\_science
"Computer science"). Several logical theories have a basis in [game
semantics](/wiki/Game\_semantics "Game semantics"). In addition, computer
scientists have used games to model [interactive
computations](/wiki/Interactive\_computation "Interactive computation"). Also,
game theory provides a theoretical basis to the field of [multi-agent
systems](/wiki/Multi-agent\_system "Multi-agent system").[126]

Separately, game theory has played a role in [online
algorithms](/wiki/Online\_algorithm "Online algorithm"); in particular, the
[k-server problem](/wiki/K-server\_problem "K-server problem"), which has in
the past been referred to as \_games with moving costs\_ and \_request-answer
games\_.[127] [Yao's principle](/wiki/Yao%27s\_principle "Yao's principle") is a
game-theoretic technique for proving [lower
bounds](/wiki/Upper\_and\_lower\_bounds "Upper and lower bounds") on the
[computational complexity](/wiki/Analysis\_of\_algorithms "Analysis of
algorithms") of [randomized algorithms](/wiki/Randomized\_algorithm "Randomized
algorithm"), especially online algorithms.

The emergence of the Internet has motivated the development of algorithms for
finding equilibria in games, markets, computational auctions, peer-to-peer
systems, and security and information markets. [Algorithmic game
theory](/wiki/Algorithmic\_game\_theory "Algorithmic game theory")[86] and
within it [algorithmic mechanism design](/wiki/Algorithmic\_mechanism\_design
"Algorithmic mechanism design")[85] combine computational [algorithm
design](/wiki/Algorithm\_design "Algorithm design") and analysis of [complex
systems](/wiki/Complex\_system "Complex system") with economic
theory.[128][129][130]
