## Rhetoric[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Conspiracy\_theory&action=edit&section=11
"Edit section: Rhetoric")]

Conspiracy theory rhetoric exploits several important [cognitive
biases](/wiki/Cognitive\_bias "Cognitive bias"), including [proportionality
bias](/wiki/Proportionality\_bias "Proportionality bias"), [attribution
bias](/wiki/Attribution\_bias "Attribution bias"), and [confirmation
bias](/wiki/Confirmation\_bias "Confirmation bias").[32] Their arguments often
take the form of asking reasonable questions, but without providing an answer
based on strong evidence.[90] Conspiracy theories are most successful when
proponents can gather followers from the general public, such as in politics,
religion and journalism. These proponents may not necessarily believe the
conspiracy theory; instead, they may just use it in an attempt to gain public
approval. Conspiratorial claims can act as a successful rhetorical strategy to
convince a portion of the public via [appeal to
emotion](/wiki/Appeal\_to\_emotion "Appeal to emotion").[28]

Conspiracy theories typically justify themselves by focusing on gaps or
ambiguities in knowledge, and then arguing that the true explanation for this
[must be a conspiracy](/wiki/Argument\_from\_ignorance "Argument from
ignorance").[62] In contrast, any evidence that directly supports their claims
is generally of low quality. For example, conspiracy theories are often
dependent on [eyewitness testimony](/wiki/Eyewitness\_testimony "Eyewitness
testimony"), despite its unreliability, while disregarding objective analyses
of the evidence.[62]

Conspiracy theories are not able to be [falsified](/wiki/Falsifiability
"Falsifiability") and are reinforced by [fallacious
arguments](/wiki/Fallacious\_arguments "Fallacious arguments"). In particular,
the logical fallacy [circular reasoning](/wiki/Circular\_reasoning "Circular
reasoning") is used by conspiracy theorists: both evidence against the
conspiracy and an absence of evidence for it are re-interpreted as evidence of
its truth,[8][14] whereby the conspiracy becomes a matter of faith rather than
something that can be proved or disproved.[1][16] The epistemic strategy of
conspiracy theories has been called "cascade logic": each time new evidence
becomes available, a conspiracy theory is able to dismiss it by claiming that
even more people must be part of the cover-up.[28][62] Any information that
contradicts the conspiracy theory is suggested to be disinformation by the
alleged conspiracy.[41] Similarly, the continued lack of evidence directly
supporting conspiracist claims is portrayed as confirming the existence of a
conspiracy of silence; the fact that other people have not found or exposed
any conspiracy is taken as evidence that those people are part of the plot,
rather than considering that it may be because no conspiracy exists.[32][62]
This strategy lets conspiracy theories insulate themselves from neutral
analyses of the evidence, and makes them resistant to questioning or
correction, which is called "epistemic self-insulation".[32][62]

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/62/False\_balance\_in\_climate\_science.png/290px-
False\_balance\_in\_climate\_science.png)](/wiki/File:False\_balance\_in\_climate\_science.png)In
2013, 97% of peer-reviewed climate science papers that took a position on the
cause of global warming said that humans are responsible, 3% said they were
not. Among [Fox News](/wiki/Fox\_News "Fox News") guests the same year, this
was presented as a false balance between the two viewpoints, with 31% of
invited guests believing it was happening and 69% not.[91]

Conspiracy theorists often take advantage of [false
balance](/wiki/False\_balance "False balance") in the media. They may claim to
be presenting a legitimate alternative viewpoint that deserves equal time to
argue its case; for example, this strategy has been used by the [Teach the
Controversy](/wiki/Teach\_the\_Controversy "Teach the Controversy") campaign to
promote [intelligent design](/wiki/Intelligent\_design "Intelligent design"),
which often claims that there is a conspiracy of scientists suppressing their
views. If they successfully find a platform to present their views in a debate
format, they focus on using rhetorical \_[ad hominems](/wiki/Ad\_hominem "Ad
hominem")\_ and attacking perceived flaws in the mainstream account, while
avoiding any discussion of the shortcomings in their own position.[28]

The typical approach of conspiracy theories is to challenge any action or
statement from authorities, using even the most tenuous justifications.
Responses are then assessed using a double standard, where failing to provide
an immediate response to the satisfaction of the conspiracy theorist will be
claimed to prove a conspiracy. Any minor errors in the response are heavily
emphasized, while deficiencies in the arguments of other proponents are
generally excused.[28]

In science, conspiracists may suggest that a [scientific
theory](/wiki/Scientific\_theory "Scientific theory") can be disproven by a
single perceived deficiency, even though such events are extremely rare. In
addition, both disregarding the claims and attempting to address them will be
interpreted as proof of a conspiracy.[28] Other conspiracist arguments may not
be scientific; for example, in response to the [IPCC Second Assessment
Report](/wiki/IPCC\_Second\_Assessment\_Report "IPCC Second Assessment Report")
in 1996, much of the opposition centered on promoting a procedural objection
to the report's creation. Specifically, it was claimed that part of the
procedure reflected a conspiracy to silence dissenters, which served as
motivation for opponents of the report and successfully redirected a
significant amount of the public discussion away from the science.[28]
