##
Consequences[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Conspiracy\_theory&action=edit&section=12
"Edit section: Consequences")]

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f1/Das\_j%C3%BCdische\_Komplott\_Parole\_der\_Woche\_December\_1941\_crop.jpg/220px-
Das\_j%C3%BCdische\_Komplott\_Parole\_der\_Woche\_December\_1941\_crop.jpg)](/wiki/File:Das\_j%C3%BCdische\_Komplott\_Parole\_der\_Woche\_December\_1941\_crop.jpg)Third
Reich Nazi anti-Semitic propaganda poster entitled Das j√ºdische Komplott ("The
Jewish Conspiracy")

Historically, conspiracy theories have been closely linked to
[prejudice](/wiki/Prejudice "Prejudice"), [witch hunts](/wiki/Witch\_hunt
"Witch hunt"), [wars](/wiki/War "War"), and [genocides](/wiki/Genocide
"Genocide").[27][28] They are often strongly believed by the perpetrators of
[terrorist](/wiki/Terrorist "Terrorist") attacks, and were used as
justification by [Timothy McVeigh](/wiki/Timothy\_McVeigh "Timothy McVeigh"),
[Anders Breivik](/wiki/Anders\_Breivik "Anders Breivik") and [Brenton
Tarrant](/wiki/Brenton\_Tarrant "Brenton Tarrant"), as well as by governments
such as [Nazi Germany](/wiki/Nazi\_Germany "Nazi Germany") and the [Soviet
Union](/wiki/Soviet\_Union "Soviet Union").[27] [AIDS
denialism](/wiki/AIDS\_denialism "AIDS denialism") by the government of [South
Africa](/wiki/South\_Africa "South Africa"), motivated by conspiracy theories,
caused an estimated 330,000 deaths from AIDS,[32][33][34] while belief in
[conspiracy theories about genetically modified
foods](/wiki/GMO\_conspiracy\_theories "GMO conspiracy theories") led the
government of [Zambia](/wiki/Zambia "Zambia") to reject food aid during a
[famine](/wiki/Famine "Famine"),[28] at a time when 3 million people in the
country were suffering from [hunger](/wiki/Hunger "Hunger").[38]

Conspiracy theories are a significant obstacle to improvements in [public
health](/wiki/Public\_health "Public health").[28][39] People who believe in
health-related conspiracy theories are less likely to follow [medical
advice](/wiki/Medical\_advice "Medical advice"), and more likely to use
[alternative medicine](/wiki/Alternative\_medicine "Alternative medicine")
instead.[27] Conspiratorial [anti-vaccination](/wiki/Anti-vaccination "Anti-
vaccination") beliefs, such as [conspiracy theories about pharmaceutical
companies](/wiki/Big\_Pharma\_conspiracy\_theory "Big Pharma conspiracy theory"),
can result in reduced vaccination rates and have been linked to outbreaks of
[vaccine-preventable diseases](/wiki/Vaccine-preventable\_disease "Vaccine-
preventable disease").[32][28][40][39] Health-related conspiracy theories
often inspire resistance to [water fluoridation](/wiki/Water\_fluoridation
"Water fluoridation"), and contributed to the impact of the [Lancet MMR autism
fraud](/wiki/Lancet\_MMR\_autism\_fraud "Lancet MMR autism fraud").[28][39]

Conspiracy theories are a fundamental component of a wide range of radicalized
and extremist groups, where they may play an important role in reinforcing the
ideology and psychology of their members as well as further radicalizing their
beliefs.[27][42] These conspiracy theories often share common themes, even
among groups that would otherwise be fundamentally opposed, such as the
[antisemitic](/wiki/Antisemitism "Antisemitism") conspiracy theories found
among political extremists on both the [far right](/wiki/Far\_right "Far
right") and [far left](/wiki/Far\_left "Far left").[27] More generally, belief
in conspiracy theories is associated with holding extreme and uncompromising
viewpoints, and may help people in maintaining those viewpoints.[41] While
conspiracy theories are not always present in extremist groups, and do not
always lead to violence when they are, they can make the group more extreme,
provide an enemy to direct hatred towards, and isolate members from the rest
of society. Conspiracy theories are most likely to inspire violence when they
call for urgent action, appeal to prejudices, or demonize and scapegoat
enemies.[42]

Conspiracy theorizing in the workplace can also have economic consequences.
For example, it leads to lower job satisfaction and lower commitment,
resulting in workers being more likely to leave their jobs.[27] Comparisons
have also been made with the effects of workplace rumors, which share some
characteristics with conspiracy theories and result in both decreased
productivity and increased stress. Subsequent effects on managers include
reduced profits, reduced trust from employees, and damage to the company's
image.[27][92]

Conspiracy theories can divert attention from important social, political, and
scientific issues.[93][94] In addition, they have been used to discredit
scientific evidence to the general public or in a legal context.
Conspiratorial strategies also share characteristics with those used by
lawyers who are attempting to discredit expert testimony, such as claiming
that the experts have ulterior motives in testifying, or attempting to find
someone who will provide statements to imply that expert opinion is more
divided than it actually is.[28]

It is possible that conspiracy theories may also produce some compensatory
benefits to society in certain situations. For example, they may help people
identify governmental deceptions, particularly in repressive societies, and
encourage [government transparency](/wiki/Government\_transparency "Government
transparency").[48][93] However, real conspiracies are normally revealed by
people working within the system, such as [whistleblowers](/wiki/Whistleblower
"Whistleblower") and [journalists](/wiki/Journalist "Journalist"), and most of
the effort spent by conspiracy theorists is inherently misdirected.[42] The
most dangerous conspiracy theories are likely to be those that incite
violence, scapegoat disadvantaged groups, or spread
[misinformation](/wiki/Misinformation "Misinformation") about important
societal issues.[95]
