### Second superstring
revolution[[edit](/w/index.php?title=String\_theory&action=edit&section=27
"Edit section: Second superstring revolution")]

In 1995, at the annual conference of string theorists at the University of
Southern California (USC), [Edward Witten](/wiki/Edward\_Witten "Edward
Witten") gave a speech on string theory that in essence united the five string
theories that existed at the time, and giving birth to a new 11-dimensional
theory called [M-theory](/wiki/M-theory "M-theory"). M-theory was also
foreshadowed in the work of [Paul Townsend](/wiki/Paul\_Townsend "Paul
Townsend") at approximately the same time. The flurry of activity that began
at this time is sometimes called the [second superstring
revolution](/wiki/Second\_superstring\_revolution "Second superstring
revolution").[31]

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/bc/JuanMaldacena.jpg/170px-
JuanMaldacena.jpg)](/wiki/File:JuanMaldacena.jpg)[Juan
Maldacena](/wiki/Juan\_Maldacena "Juan Maldacena")

During this period, [Tom Banks](/wiki/Tom\_Banks\_\(physicist\) "Tom Banks
\(physicist\)"), [Willy Fischler](/wiki/Willy\_Fischler "Willy Fischler"),
[Stephen Shenker](/wiki/Stephen\_Shenker "Stephen Shenker") and [Leonard
Susskind](/wiki/Leonard\_Susskind "Leonard Susskind") formulated matrix theory,
a full holographic description of M-theory using IIA D0 branes.[48] This was
the first definition of string theory that was fully non-perturbative and a
concrete mathematical realization of the [holographic
principle](/wiki/Holographic\_principle "Holographic principle"). It is an
example of a gauge-gravity duality and is now understood to be a special case
of the [AdS/CFT correspondence](/wiki/AdS/CFT\_correspondence "AdS/CFT
correspondence"). [Andrew Strominger](/wiki/Andrew\_Strominger "Andrew
Strominger") and [Cumrun Vafa](/wiki/Cumrun\_Vafa "Cumrun Vafa") calculated the
entropy of certain configurations of D-branes and found agreement with the
semi-classical answer for extreme charged black holes.[59] [Petr
Hořava](/wiki/Petr\_Ho%C5%99ava\_\(theorist\) "Petr Hořava \(theorist\)") and
Witten found the eleven-dimensional formulation of the heterotic string
theories, showing that orbifolds solve the chirality problem. Witten noted
that the effective description of the physics of D-branes at low energies is
by a supersymmetric gauge theory, and found geometrical interpretations of
mathematical structures in gauge theory that he and [Nathan
Seiberg](/wiki/Nathan\_Seiberg "Nathan Seiberg") had earlier discovered in
terms of the location of the branes.

In 1997, [Juan Maldacena](/wiki/Juan\_Maldacena "Juan Maldacena") noted that
the low energy excitations of a theory near a black hole consist of objects
close to the horizon, which for extreme charged black holes looks like an
[anti-de Sitter space](/wiki/Anti-de\_Sitter\_space "Anti-de Sitter space").[68]
He noted that in this limit the gauge theory describes the string excitations
near the branes. So he hypothesized that string theory on a near-horizon
extreme-charged black-hole geometry, an anti-de Sitter space times a sphere
with flux, is equally well described by the low-energy limiting [gauge
theory](/wiki/Gauge\_theory "Gauge theory"), the [N = 4 supersymmetric
Yang–Mills theory](/wiki/N\_%3D\_4\_supersymmetric\_Yang%E2%80%93Mills\_theory "N =
4 supersymmetric Yang–Mills theory"). This hypothesis, which is called the
[AdS/CFT correspondence](/wiki/AdS/CFT\_correspondence "AdS/CFT
correspondence"), was further developed by [Steven Gubser](/wiki/Steven\_Gubser
"Steven Gubser"), [Igor Klebanov](/wiki/Igor\_Klebanov "Igor Klebanov") and
[Alexander Polyakov](/wiki/Alexander\_Markovich\_Polyakov "Alexander Markovich
Polyakov"),[69] and by Edward Witten,[70] and it is now well-accepted. It is a
concrete realization of the [holographic
principle](/wiki/Holographic\_principle "Holographic principle"), which has
far-reaching implications for [black holes](/wiki/Black\_hole "Black hole"),
[locality](/wiki/Principle\_of\_locality "Principle of locality") and
[information](/wiki/Information "Information") in physics, as well as the
nature of the gravitational interaction.[53] Through this relationship, string
theory has been shown to be related to gauge theories like [quantum
chromodynamics](/wiki/Quantum\_chromodynamics "Quantum chromodynamics") and
this has led to a more quantitative understanding of the behavior of
[hadrons](/wiki/Hadron "Hadron"), bringing string theory back to its
roots.[\_[citation needed](/wiki/Wikipedia:Citation\_needed "Wikipedia:Citation
needed")\_]
