### Scientific
methods[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Galileo\_Galilei&action=edit&section=19 "Edit
section: Scientific methods")]

Galileo made original contributions to the science of motion through an
innovative combination of experiments and mathematics.[171] More typical of
science at the time were the qualitative studies of [William
Gilbert](/wiki/William\_Gilbert\_\(astronomer\) "William Gilbert
\(astronomer\)"), on magnetism and electricity. Galileo's father, [Vincenzo
Galilei](/wiki/Vincenzo\_Galilei "Vincenzo Galilei"), a [lutenist](/wiki/Lute
"Lute") and music theorist, had performed experiments establishing perhaps the
oldest known non-linear relation in physics: for a stretched string, the pitch
varies as the square root of the tension.[172] These observations lay within
the framework of the
[Pythagorean](/wiki/Pythagoras#Musical\_theories\_and\_investigations
"Pythagoras") tradition of music, well known to instrument makers, which
included the fact that subdividing a string by a whole number produces a
harmonious scale. Thus, a limited amount of mathematics had long related to
music and physical science, and young Galileo could see his own father's
observations expand on that tradition.[173]

Galileo was one of the first modern thinkers to clearly state that the [laws
of nature](/wiki/Physical\_law "Physical law") are mathematical. In \_[The
Assayer](/wiki/The\_Assayer#Science,\_mathematics,\_and\_philosophy "The
Assayer")\_ , he wrote "Philosophy is written in this grand book, the universe
... It is written in the language of mathematics, and its characters are
triangles, circles, and other geometric figures;...."[174] His mathematical
analyses are a further development of a tradition employed by late
[scholastic](/wiki/Scholasticism "Scholasticism") natural philosophers, which
Galileo learned when he studied philosophy.[175] His work marked another step
towards the eventual separation of science from both philosophy and religion;
a major development in human thought. He was often willing to change his views
in accordance with observation.

In order to perform his experiments, Galileo had to set up standards of length
and time, so that measurements made on different days and in different
laboratories could be compared in a reproducible fashion. This provided a
reliable foundation on which to confirm mathematical laws using [inductive
reasoning](/wiki/Inductive\_reasoning "Inductive reasoning").[\_[citation
needed](/wiki/Wikipedia:Citation\_needed "Wikipedia:Citation needed")\_] Galileo
showed a modern appreciation for the proper relationship between mathematics,
theoretical physics, and experimental physics. He understood the
[parabola](/wiki/Parabola "Parabola"), both in terms of [conic
sections](/wiki/Conic\_section "Conic section") and in terms of the
[ordinate](/wiki/Ordinate "Ordinate") (y) varying as the square of the
[abscissa](/wiki/Abscissa "Abscissa") (x). Galileo further asserted that the
parabola was the theoretically ideal [trajectory](/wiki/Trajectory
"Trajectory") of a uniformly accelerated projectile in the absence of [air
resistance](/wiki/Air\_resistance "Air resistance") or other disturbances. He
conceded that there are limits to the validity of this theory, noting on
theoretical grounds that a projectile trajectory of a size comparable to that
of the Earth could not possibly be a parabola,[176][177][178] but he
nevertheless maintained that for distances up to the range of the artillery of
his day, the deviation of a projectile's trajectory from a parabola would be
only very slight.[176][179][180]
