### Classical[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Physics&action=edit&section=5 "Edit
section: Classical")]

Main article: [Classical physics](/wiki/Classical\_physics "Classical physics")

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/39/GodfreyKneller-
IsaacNewton-1689.jpg/170px-GodfreyKneller-
IsaacNewton-1689.jpg)](/wiki/File:GodfreyKneller-IsaacNewton-1689.jpg)[Isaac
Newton](/wiki/Isaac\_Newton "Isaac Newton") discovered the [laws of
motion](/wiki/Newton%27s\_laws\_of\_motion "Newton's laws of motion") and
[universal gravitation](/wiki/Newton%27s\_law\_of\_universal\_gravitation
"Newton's law of universal gravitation")

Physics became a separate science when [early modern
Europeans](/wiki/Early\_modern\_Europe "Early modern Europe") used experimental
and quantitative methods to discover what are now considered to be the [laws
of physics](/wiki/Laws\_of\_physics "Laws of physics").[30][\_[page
needed](/wiki/Wikipedia:Citing\_sources "Wikipedia:Citing sources")\_]

Major developments in this period include the replacement of the [geocentric
model](/wiki/Geocentric\_model "Geocentric model") of the [Solar
System](/wiki/Solar\_System "Solar System") with the heliocentric [Copernican
model](/wiki/Copernican\_model "Copernican model"), the [laws governing the
motion of planetary bodies](/wiki/Kepler%27s\_laws "Kepler's laws") (determined
by Kepler between 1609 and 1619), Galileo's pioneering work on
[telescopes](/wiki/Telescope "Telescope") and [observational
astronomy](/wiki/Observational\_astronomy "Observational astronomy") in the
16th and 17th centuries, and [Isaac Newton](/wiki/Isaac\_Newton "Isaac
Newton")'s discovery and unification of the [laws of
motion](/wiki/Newton%27s\_laws\_of\_motion "Newton's laws of motion") and
[universal gravitation](/wiki/Newton%27s\_law\_of\_universal\_gravitation
"Newton's law of universal gravitation") (that would come to bear his
name).[31] Newton also developed [calculus](/wiki/Calculus "Calculus"),[b] the
mathematical study of continuous change, which provided new mathematical
methods for solving physical problems.[32]

The discovery of laws in [thermodynamics](/wiki/Thermodynamics
"Thermodynamics"), [chemistry](/wiki/Chemistry "Chemistry"), and
[electromagnetics](/wiki/Electromagnetics "Electromagnetics") resulted from
research efforts during the [Industrial
Revolution](/wiki/Industrial\_Revolution "Industrial Revolution") as energy
needs increased.[33] The laws comprising classical physics remain widely used
for objects on everyday scales travelling at non-relativistic speeds, since
they provide a close approximation in such situations, and theories such as
[quantum mechanics](/wiki/Quantum\_mechanics "Quantum mechanics") and the
[theory of relativity](/wiki/Theory\_of\_relativity "Theory of relativity")
simplify to their classical equivalents at such scales. Inaccuracies in
[classical mechanics](/wiki/Classical\_mechanics "Classical mechanics") for
very small objects and very high velocities led to the development of modern
physics in the 20th century.
