### Monstrous
moonshine[[edit](/w/index.php?title=String\_theory&action=edit&section=23 "Edit
section: Monstrous moonshine")]

Main article: [Monstrous moonshine](/wiki/Monstrous\_moonshine "Monstrous
moonshine")

[![An equilateral triangle with a line joining each vertex to the midpoint of
the opposite
side](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/38/Labeled\_Triangle\_Reflections.svg/200px-
Labeled\_Triangle\_Reflections.svg.png)](/wiki/File:Labeled\_Triangle\_Reflections.svg)An
equilateral triangle can be rotated through 120°, 240°, or 360°, or reflected
in any of the three lines pictured without changing its shape.

[Group theory](/wiki/Group\_theory "Group theory") is the branch of mathematics
that studies the concept of [symmetry](/wiki/Symmetry "Symmetry"). For
example, one can consider a geometric shape such as an equilateral triangle.
There are various operations that one can perform on this triangle without
changing its shape. One can rotate it through 120°, 240°, or 360°, or one can
reflect in any of the lines labeled \_S\_ 0, \_S\_ 1, or \_S\_ 2 in the picture.
Each of these operations is called a \_symmetry\_ , and the collection of these
symmetries satisfies certain technical properties making it into what
mathematicians call a [group](/wiki/Group\_\(mathematics\) "Group
\(mathematics\)"). In this particular example, the group is known as the
[dihedral group](/wiki/Dihedral\_group "Dihedral group") of
[order](/wiki/Order\_\(group\_theory\) "Order \(group theory\)") 6 because it
has six elements. A general group may describe finitely many or infinitely
many symmetries; if there are only finitely many symmetries, it is called a
[finite group](/wiki/Finite\_group "Finite group").[104]

Mathematicians often strive for a
[classification](/wiki/Classification\_theorems "Classification theorems") (or
list) of all mathematical objects of a given type. It is generally believed
that finite groups are too diverse to admit a useful classification. A more
modest but still challenging problem is to classify all finite \_simple\_
groups. These are finite groups that may be used as building blocks for
constructing arbitrary finite groups in the same way that [prime
numbers](/wiki/Prime\_number "Prime number") can be used to construct arbitrary
[whole numbers](/wiki/Integer "Integer") by taking products.[f] One of the
major achievements of contemporary group theory is the [classification of
finite simple groups](/wiki/Classification\_of\_finite\_simple\_groups
"Classification of finite simple groups"), a mathematical theorem that
provides a list of all possible finite simple groups.[104]

This classification theorem identifies several infinite families of groups as
well as 26 additional groups which do not fit into any family. The latter
groups are called the "sporadic" groups, and each one owes its existence to a
remarkable combination of circumstances. The largest sporadic group, the so-
called [monster group](/wiki/Monster\_group "Monster group"), has over 1053
elements, more than a thousand times the number of atoms in the Earth.[105]

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/37/KleinInvariantJ.jpg/300px-
KleinInvariantJ.jpg)](/wiki/File:KleinInvariantJ.jpg)A graph of the [\_j\_
-function](/wiki/J-invariant "J-invariant") in the complex plane

A seemingly unrelated construction is the [\_j\_ -function](/wiki/J-invariant
"J-invariant") of [number theory](/wiki/Number\_theory "Number theory"). This
object belongs to a special class of functions called [modular
functions](/wiki/Modular\_function "Modular function"), whose graphs form a
certain kind of repeating pattern.[106] Although this function appears in a
branch of mathematics that seems very different from the theory of finite
groups, the two subjects turn out to be intimately related. In the late 1970s,
mathematicians [John McKay](/wiki/John\_McKay\_\(mathematician\) "John McKay
\(mathematician\)") and [John Thompson](/wiki/John\_G.\_Thompson "John G.
Thompson") noticed that certain numbers arising in the analysis of the monster
group (namely, the dimensions of its [irreducible
representations](/wiki/Irreducible\_representation "Irreducible
representation")) are related to numbers that appear in a formula for the \_j\_
-function (namely, the coefficients of its [Fourier
series](/wiki/Fourier\_series "Fourier series")).[107] This relationship was
further developed by [John Horton Conway](/wiki/John\_Horton\_Conway "John
Horton Conway") and [Simon Norton](/wiki/Simon\_P.\_Norton "Simon P.
Norton")[108] who called it [monstrous moonshine](/wiki/Monstrous\_moonshine
"Monstrous moonshine") because it seemed so far fetched.[109]

In 1992, [Richard Borcherds](/wiki/Richard\_Borcherds "Richard Borcherds")
constructed a bridge between the theory of modular functions and finite groups
and, in the process, explained the observations of McKay and
Thompson.[110][111] Borcherds' work used ideas from string theory in an
essential way, extending earlier results of [Igor Frenkel](/wiki/Igor\_Frenkel
"Igor Frenkel"), [James Lepowsky](/wiki/James\_Lepowsky "James Lepowsky"), and
[Arne Meurman](/wiki/Arne\_Meurman "Arne Meurman"), who had realized the
monster group as the symmetries of a
particular[\_[which?](/wiki/Wikipedia:Avoid\_weasel\_words "Wikipedia:Avoid
weasel words")\_] version of string theory.[112] In 1998, Borcherds was awarded
the [Fields medal](/wiki/Fields\_medal "Fields medal") for his work.[113]

Since the 1990s, the connection between string theory and moonshine has led to
further results in mathematics and physics.[105] In 2010, physicists [Tohru
Eguchi](/wiki/Tohru\_Eguchi "Tohru Eguchi"), [Hirosi
Ooguri](/wiki/Hirosi\_Ooguri "Hirosi Ooguri"), and Yuji Tachikawa discovered
connections between a different sporadic group, the [Mathieu group \_M\_
24](/wiki/Mathieu\_group\_M24 "Mathieu group M24"), and a certain
version[\_[which?](/wiki/Wikipedia:Avoid\_weasel\_words "Wikipedia:Avoid weasel
words")\_] of string theory.[114] [Miranda Cheng](/wiki/Miranda\_Cheng "Miranda
Cheng"), John Duncan, and [Jeffrey A. Harvey](/wiki/Jeffrey\_A.\_Harvey "Jeffrey
A. Harvey") proposed a generalization of this moonshine phenomenon called
[umbral moonshine](/wiki/Umbral\_moonshine "Umbral moonshine"),[115] and their
conjecture was proved mathematically by Duncan, Michael Griffin, and [Ken
Ono](/wiki/Ken\_Ono "Ken Ono").[116] Witten has also speculated that the
version of string theory appearing in monstrous moonshine might be related to
a certain simplified model of gravity in three spacetime dimensions.[117]
