###
Science[[edit](/w/index.php?title=The\_Big\_Bang\_Theory&action=edit&section=8
"Edit section: Science")]

Much of the series focuses on science, particularly physics. The four main
male characters are employed at
[Caltech](/wiki/California\_Institute\_of\_Technology "California Institute of
Technology") and have science-related occupations, as do Bernadette and Amy.
The characters frequently banter about scientific theories or news (notably
around the [start of the show](/wiki/Cold\_open "Cold open")) and make science-
related jokes.

Science has also interfered with the characters' romantic lives. Leslie breaks
up with Leonard when he sides with Sheldon in his support for [string
theory](/wiki/String\_theory "String theory") rather than [loop quantum
gravity](/wiki/Loop\_quantum\_gravity "Loop quantum gravity").[69] When Leonard
joins Sheldon, Raj, and Howard on a three-month Arctic research trip, it
separates Leonard and Penny at a time when their relationship is budding. When
Bernadette takes an interest in Leonard's work, it makes both Penny and Howard
envious and results in Howard confronting Leonard and Penny asking Sheldon to
teach her physics.[70] Sheldon and Amy also briefly end their relationship
after an argument over which of their fields is superior.[71]

As the theme of the show revolves around science, many distinguished and high-
profile scientists have appeared as guest stars on the show. Famous
[astrophysicist](/wiki/Astrophysics "Astrophysics") and Nobel laureate [George
Smoot](/wiki/George\_Smoot "George Smoot") had a [cameo
appearance](/wiki/Cameo\_appearance "Cameo appearance") in the second
season.[72] Chemical engineer and Nobel laureate [Frances
Arnold](/wiki/Frances\_Arnold "Frances Arnold") portrayed herself in the 12th
season.[73][74] [Theoretical physicist](/wiki/Theoretical\_physics "Theoretical
physics") [Brian Greene](/wiki/Brian\_Greene "Brian Greene") appeared in the
fourth season, as well as astrophysicist, science popularizer, and [physics
outreach](/wiki/Physics\_outreach "Physics outreach") specialist [Neil deGrasse
Tyson](/wiki/Neil\_deGrasse\_Tyson "Neil deGrasse Tyson"), who also appeared in
the twelfth season.[75] [Cosmologist](/wiki/Cosmology "Cosmology") [Stephen
Hawking](/wiki/Stephen\_Hawking "Stephen Hawking") made a short guest
appearance in a fifth-season episode;[76] in the eighth season, Hawking video
conferences with Sheldon and Leonard, and he makes another appearance in the
200th episode. In the fifth and sixth seasons, NASA astronaut [Michael J.
Massimino](/wiki/Michael\_J.\_Massimino "Michael J. Massimino") played himself
multiple times in the role of Howard's fellow astronaut. [Bill
Nye](/wiki/Bill\_Nye "Bill Nye") appeared in the seventh and twelfth
seasons.[\_[citation needed](/wiki/Wikipedia:Citation\_needed
"Wikipedia:Citation needed")\_]
