### Controversy over
heliocentrism[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Galileo\_Galilei&action=edit&section=16
"Edit section: Controversy over heliocentrism")]

Main article: [Galileo affair](/wiki/Galileo\_affair "Galileo affair")

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/88/Galileo\_facing\_the\_Roman\_Inquisition.jpg/220px-
Galileo\_facing\_the\_Roman\_Inquisition.jpg)](/wiki/File:Galileo\_facing\_the\_Roman\_Inquisition.jpg)[Cristiano
Banti](/wiki/Cristiano\_Banti "Cristiano Banti")'s 1857 painting \_Galileo
facing the[Roman Inquisition](/wiki/Roman\_Inquisition "Roman Inquisition")\_

At the time of Galileo's conflict with the Church, the majority of educated
people subscribed to the [Aristotelian](/wiki/Aristotle "Aristotle")
[geocentric](/wiki/Geocentric "Geocentric") view that the Earth is the [centre
of the Universe](/wiki/History\_of\_the\_center\_of\_the\_Universe "History of the
center of the Universe") and the orbit of all heavenly bodies, or Tycho
Brahe's new system blending geocentrism with heliocentrism.[121][122]
Opposition to heliocentrism and Galileo's writings on it combined religious
and scientific objections. Religious opposition to heliocentrism arose from
biblical passages implying the fixed nature of the Earth.[d] Scientific
opposition came from Brahe, who argued that if heliocentrism were true, an
annual stellar parallax should be observed, though none was at the time.[e]
Aristarchus and Copernicus had correctly postulated that parallax was
negligible because the stars were so distant. However, Tycho countered that
since stars [appear to have measurable angular size](/wiki/Airy\_disk "Airy
disk"), if the stars were that distant and their apparent size is due to their
physical size, they would be far larger than the Sun. In fact, [it is not
possible to observe the physical size of distant
stars](/wiki/Magnitude\_\(astronomy\)#History "Magnitude \(astronomy\)")
without modern telescopes.[125][f]

Galileo defended heliocentrism based on [his astronomical observations of
1609](/wiki/Sidereus\_Nuncius "Sidereus Nuncius"). In December 1613, the Grand
Duchess [Christina of Florence](/wiki/Christina\_of\_Lorraine "Christina of
Lorraine") confronted one of Galileo's friends and followers, [Benedetto
Castelli](/wiki/Benedetto\_Castelli "Benedetto Castelli"), with biblical
objections to the motion of the Earth.[g] Prompted by this incident, Galileo
wrote a [letter to Castelli](/wiki/Letter\_to\_Benedetto\_Castelli "Letter to
Benedetto Castelli") in which he argued that heliocentrism was actually not
contrary to biblical texts, and that the Bible was an authority on faith and
morals, not science. This letter was not published, but circulated
widely.[126] Two years later, Galileo wrote a [letter to
Christina](/wiki/Letter\_to\_the\_Grand\_Duchess\_Christina "Letter to the Grand
Duchess Christina") that expanded his arguments previously made in eight pages
to forty pages.[127]

By 1615, Galileo's writings on heliocentrism had been submitted to the [Roman
Inquisition](/wiki/Roman\_Inquisition "Roman Inquisition") by Father [Niccolò
Lorini](/wiki/Niccol%C3%B2\_Lorini "Niccolò Lorini"), who claimed that Galileo
and his followers were attempting to reinterpret the Bible,[d] which was seen
as a violation of the [Council of Trent](/wiki/Council\_of\_Trent "Council of
Trent") and looked dangerously like [Protestantism](/wiki/Protestantism
"Protestantism").[128] Lorini specifically cited Galileo's letter to
Castelli.[129] Galileo went to Rome to defend himself and his ideas. At the
start of 1616, [Francesco Ingoli](/wiki/Francesco\_Ingoli "Francesco Ingoli")
initiated a debate with Galileo, sending him an essay disputing the Copernican
system. Galileo later stated that he believed this essay to have been
instrumental in the action against Copernicanism that followed.[130] Ingoli
may have been commissioned by the Inquisition to write an expert opinion on
the controversy, with the essay providing the basis for the Inquisition's
actions.[131] The essay focused on eighteen physical and mathematical
arguments against heliocentrism. It borrowed primarily from Tycho Brahe's
arguments, notably that heliocentrism would require the stars as they appeared
to be much larger than the Sun.[h] The essay also included four theological
arguments, but Ingoli suggested Galileo focus on the physical and mathematical
arguments, and he did not mention Galileo's biblical ideas.[133]

In February 1616, an Inquisitorial commission declared heliocentrism to be
"foolish and absurd in philosophy, and formally heretical since it explicitly
contradicts in many places the sense of Holy Scripture". The Inquisition found
that the idea of the Earth's movement "receives the same judgement in
philosophy and ... in regard to theological truth, it is at least erroneous in
faith".[134] [Pope Paul V](/wiki/Pope\_Paul\_V "Pope Paul V") instructed
Cardinal Bellarmine to deliver this finding to Galileo, and to order him to
abandon heliocentrism. On 26 February, Galileo was called to Bellarmine's
residence and ordered "to abandon completely ... the opinion that the sun
stands still at the centre of the world and the Earth moves, and henceforth
not to hold, teach, or defend it in any way whatever, either orally or in
writing."[135] The decree of the [Congregation of the
Index](/wiki/Congregation\_of\_the\_Index "Congregation of the Index") banned
Copernicus's \_De Revolutionibus\_ and other heliocentric works until
correction.[135]

For the next decade, Galileo stayed well away from the controversy. He revived
his project of writing a book on the subject, encouraged by the election of
Cardinal Maffeo [Barberini](/wiki/Barberini "Barberini") as [Pope Urban
VIII](/wiki/Pope\_Urban\_VIII "Pope Urban VIII") in 1623. Barberini was a friend
and admirer of Galileo, and had opposed the admonition of Galileo in 1616.
Galileo's resulting book, \_Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems\_ ,
was published in 1632, with formal authorization from the Inquisition and
papal permission.[136]

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d4/Justus\_Sustermans\_-
\_Portrait\_of\_Galileo\_Galilei%2C\_1636.jpg/220px-Justus\_Sustermans\_-
\_Portrait\_of\_Galileo\_Galilei%2C\_1636.jpg)](/wiki/File:Justus\_Sustermans\_-
\_Portrait\_of\_Galileo\_Galilei,\_1636.jpg)\_Portrait of Galilei\_ by [Justus
Sustermans](/wiki/Justus\_Sustermans "Justus Sustermans"), 1636. [National
Maritime Museum](/wiki/National\_Maritime\_Museum "National Maritime Museum"),
[Greenwich](/wiki/Greenwich "Greenwich").

Earlier, Pope Urban VIII had personally asked Galileo to give arguments for
and against heliocentrism in the book, and to be careful not to advocate
heliocentrism. Whether unknowingly or deliberately, Simplicio, the defender of
the Aristotelian geocentric view in \_Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World
Systems\_ , was often caught in his own errors and sometimes came across as a
fool. Indeed, although Galileo states in the preface of his book that the
character is named after a famous Aristotelian philosopher
([Simplicius](/wiki/Simplicius\_of\_Cilicia "Simplicius of Cilicia") in Latin,
"Simplicio" in Italian), the name "Simplicio" in Italian also has the
connotation of "simpleton".[137][138] This portrayal of Simplicio made
\_Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems\_ appear as an advocacy book:
an attack on Aristotelian geocentrism and defence of the Copernican
theory.[\_[citation needed](/wiki/Wikipedia:Citation\_needed "Wikipedia:Citation
needed")\_]

Most historians agree Galileo did not act out of malice and felt blindsided by
the reaction to his book.[i] However, the Pope did not take the suspected
public ridicule lightly, nor the Copernican advocacy.[\_[citation
needed](/wiki/Wikipedia:Citation\_needed "Wikipedia:Citation needed")\_]

Galileo had alienated one of his biggest and most powerful supporters, the
Pope, and was called to Rome to defend his writings[142] in September 1632. He
finally arrived in February 1633 and was brought before inquisitor [Vincenzo
Maculani](/wiki/Vincenzo\_Maculani "Vincenzo Maculani") to be
[charged](/wiki/Criminal\_charge "Criminal charge"). Throughout his trial,
Galileo steadfastly maintained that since 1616 he had faithfully kept his
promise not to hold any of the condemned opinions, and initially he denied
even defending them. However, he was eventually persuaded to admit that,
contrary to his true intention, a reader of his \_Dialogue\_ could well have
obtained the impression that it was intended to be a defence of Copernicanism.
In view of Galileo's rather implausible denial that he had ever held
Copernican ideas after 1616 or ever intended to defend them in the \_Dialogue\_
, his final interrogation, in July 1633, concluded with his being threatened
with torture if he did not tell the truth, but he maintained his denial
despite the threat.[143][144][145]

The sentence of the Inquisition was delivered on 22 June. It was in three
essential parts:

 \* Galileo was found "vehemently suspect of heresy" (though he was never formally charged with heresy, relieving him of facing corporal punishment),[146] namely of having held the opinions that the Sun lies motionless at the centre of the universe, that the Earth is not at its centre and moves, and that one may hold and defend an opinion as probable after it has been declared contrary to Holy Scripture. He was required to "[abjure](/wiki/Abjure "Abjure"), curse and detest" those opinions.[147][148][149][150]
 \* He was sentenced to formal imprisonment at the pleasure of the Inquisition.[151] On the following day, this was commuted to house arrest, under which he remained for the rest of his life.[152]
 \* His offending \_Dialogue\_ was banned; and in an action not announced at the trial, publication of any of his works was forbidden, including any he might write in the future.[153][154]

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/06/E\_pur\_si\_muove.jpg/220px-
E\_pur\_si\_muove.jpg)](/wiki/File:E\_pur\_si\_muove.jpg)Portrait, originally
attributed to Murillo, of Galileo gazing at the words "E pur si muove" (\_[And
yet it moves](/wiki/E\_pur\_si\_muove! "E pur si muove!")\_) (not legible in this
image) scratched on the wall of his prison cell. The attribution and narrative
surrounding the painting have since been contested.

According to popular legend, after recanting his theory that the Earth moved
around the Sun, Galileo allegedly muttered the rebellious phrase "[And yet it
moves](/wiki/E\_pur\_si\_muove! "E pur si muove!")". There was a claim that a
1640s painting by the Spanish painter [Bartolomé Esteban
Murillo](/wiki/Bartolom%C3%A9\_Esteban\_Murillo "Bartolomé Esteban Murillo") or
an artist of his school, in which the words were hidden until restoration work
in 1911, depicts an imprisoned Galileo apparently gazing at the words "E pur
si muove" written on the wall of his dungeon. The earliest known written
account of the legend dates to a century after his death. Based on the
painting, [Stillman Drake](/wiki/Stillman\_Drake "Stillman Drake") wrote "there
is no doubt now that the famous words were already attributed to Galileo
before his death".[155] However, an intensive investigation by astrophysicist
[Mario Livio](/wiki/Mario\_Livio "Mario Livio") has revealed that said painting
is most probably a copy of an 1837 painting by the Flemish painter Roman-
Eugene Van Maldeghem.[156]

After a period with the friendly [Ascanio
Piccolomini](/wiki/Ascanio\_II\_Piccolomini "Ascanio II Piccolomini") (the
Archbishop of [Siena](/wiki/Siena "Siena")), Galileo was allowed to return to
his villa at [Arcetri](/wiki/Arcetri "Arcetri") near Florence in 1634, where
he spent part of his life under house arrest. Galileo was ordered to read the
[Seven Penitential Psalms](/wiki/Seven\_Penitential\_Psalms "Seven Penitential
Psalms") once a week for the next three years. However, his daughter Maria
Celeste relieved him of the burden after securing
[ecclesiastical](/wiki/Ecclesiastical "Ecclesiastical") permission to take it
upon herself.[157]

It was while Galileo was under house arrest that he dedicated his time to one
of his finest works, \_[Two New Sciences](/wiki/Two\_New\_Sciences "Two New
Sciences")\_. Here he summarised work he had done some forty years earlier, on
the two sciences now called [kinematics](/wiki/Kinematics "Kinematics") and
[strength of materials](/wiki/Strength\_of\_materials "Strength of materials"),
published in Holland to avoid the censor. This book was highly praised by
Albert Einstein.[158] As a result of this work, Galileo is often called the
"father of modern physics". He went completely blind in 1638 and developed a
painful [hernia](/wiki/Hernia "Hernia") and [insomnia](/wiki/Insomnia
"Insomnia"), so he was permitted to travel to Florence for medical advice.[14]

[Dava Sobel](/wiki/Dava\_Sobel "Dava Sobel") argues that prior to Galileo's
1633 trial and judgement for heresy, Pope Urban VIII had become preoccupied
with court intrigue and problems of state and began to fear persecution or
threats to his own life. In this context, Sobel argues that the problem of
Galileo was presented to the pope by court insiders and enemies of Galileo.
Having been accused of weakness in defending the church, Urban reacted against
Galileo out of anger and fear.[159] Mario Livio places Galileo and his
discoveries in modern scientific and social contexts. In particular, he argues
that the Galileo affair has its counterpart in science denial.[160]
