### Ancient astronomy[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Physics&action=edit&section=2
"Edit section: Ancient astronomy")]

Main article: [History of astronomy](/wiki/History\_of\_astronomy "History of
astronomy")

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/34/Senenmut-
Grab.JPG/400px-Senenmut-Grab.JPG)](/wiki/File:Senenmut-Grab.JPG)Ancient
[Egyptian astronomy](/wiki/Egyptian\_astronomy "Egyptian astronomy") is evident
in monuments like the [ceiling of Senemut's
tomb](/wiki/Astronomical\_ceiling\_of\_Senemut\_Tomb "Astronomical ceiling of
Senemut Tomb") from the [Eighteenth Dynasty of
Egypt](/wiki/Eighteenth\_Dynasty\_of\_Egypt "Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt").

[Astronomy](/wiki/Astronomy "Astronomy") is one of the oldest [natural
sciences](/wiki/Natural\_science "Natural science"). Early civilizations dating
before 3000 BCE, such as the [Sumerians](/wiki/Sumer "Sumer"), [ancient
Egyptians](/wiki/Ancient\_Egypt "Ancient Egypt"), and the [Indus Valley
Civilisation](/wiki/Indus\_Valley\_Civilisation "Indus Valley Civilisation"),
had a predictive knowledge and a basic awareness of the motions of the Sun,
Moon, and stars. The stars and planets, believed to represent gods, were often
worshipped. While the explanations for the observed positions of the stars
were often unscientific and lacking in evidence, these early observations laid
the foundation for later astronomy, as the stars were found to traverse [great
circles](/wiki/Great\_circle "Great circle") across the sky,[5] which could not
explain the positions of the [planets](/wiki/Planet "Planet").

According to [Asger Aaboe](/wiki/Asger\_Aaboe "Asger Aaboe"), the origins of
Western astronomy can be found in [Mesopotamia](/wiki/Mesopotamia
"Mesopotamia"), and all Western efforts in the [exact
sciences](/wiki/Exact\_science "Exact science") are descended from late
[Babylonian astronomy](/wiki/Babylonian\_astronomy "Babylonian astronomy").[10]
[Egyptian astronomers](/wiki/Egyptian\_astronomy "Egyptian astronomy") left
monuments showing knowledge of the constellations and the motions of the
celestial bodies,[11] while Greek poet [Homer](/wiki/Homer "Homer") wrote of
various celestial objects in his \_[Iliad](/wiki/Iliad "Iliad")\_ and
\_[Odyssey](/wiki/Odyssey "Odyssey")\_ ; later [Greek
astronomers](/wiki/Greek\_astronomy "Greek astronomy") provided names, which
are still used today, for most constellations visible from the [Northern
Hemisphere](/wiki/Northern\_Hemisphere "Northern Hemisphere").[12]
