Sexual abuse between children

\*\*Child-on-child sexual abuse\*\* is a form of [child sexual
abuse](/wiki/Child\_sexual\_abuse "Child sexual abuse") in which a prepubescent
child is [sexually abused](/wiki/Sexual\_abuse "Sexual abuse") by one or more
other children or [adolescents](/wiki/Adolescence "Adolescence"), and in which
no adult is directly involved. While this includes when one of the children
uses physical force, threats, trickery or [emotional
manipulation](/wiki/Psychological\_manipulation "Psychological manipulation")
to elicit cooperation, it also can include non-coercive situations where the
initiator proposes or starts a sexual act that the victim does not understand
the nature of and simply goes along with, not comprehending its implications
or what the consequences might be.[1]

Child-on-child sexual abuse is differentiated from [normative](/wiki/Normative
"Normative") sexual play or anatomical curiosity and exploration (e.g.
"[playing doctor](/wiki/Playing\_doctor "Playing doctor")") because child-on-
child sexual abuse is an overt and deliberate action directed at [sexual
stimulation](/wiki/Sexual\_stimulation "Sexual stimulation"), including
[orgasm](/wiki/Orgasm "Orgasm").[2] When sexual abuse is perpetrated by one
sibling upon another, it is known as "[inter-sibling abuse](/wiki/Inter-
sibling\_abuse "Inter-sibling abuse")".[3] When victims of inter-sibling child-
on-child sexual abuse grow up, they often have a distorted recollection of the
act, such as thinking it was [consensual](/wiki/Consensual "Consensual") or
that they were the initiator.[4]
