### Shamanic origins[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Yggdrasil&action=edit&section=9
"Edit section: Shamanic origins")]

[Hilda Ellis Davidson](/wiki/Hilda\_Ellis\_Davidson "Hilda Ellis Davidson")
comments that the existence of nine worlds around Yggdrasil is mentioned more
than once in Old Norse sources, but the identity of the worlds is never stated
outright, though it can be deduced from various sources. Davidson comments
that "no doubt the identity of the nine varied from time to time as the
emphasis changed or new imagery arrived". Davidson says that it is unclear
where the nine worlds are located in relation to the tree; they could either
exist one above the other or perhaps be grouped around the tree, but there are
references to worlds existing beneath the tree, while the gods are pictured as
in the sky, a rainbow bridge ([Bifröst](/wiki/Bifr%C3%B6st "Bifröst"))
connecting the tree with other worlds. Davidson opines that "those who have
tried to produce a convincing diagram of the [Scandinavian](/wiki/Scandinavia
"Scandinavia") cosmos from what we are told in the sources have only added to
the confusion".[22]

Davidson notes parallels between Yggdrasil and [shamanic](/wiki/Shamanism
"Shamanism") lore in northern Eurasia:

> The conception of the tree rising through a number of worlds is found in
> northern Eurasia and forms part of the shamanic lore shared by many peoples
> of this region. This seems to be a very ancient conception, perhaps based on
> the [Pole Star](/wiki/Pole\_Star "Pole Star"), the centre of the heavens, and
> the image of the central tree in Scandinavia may have been influenced by
> it.... Among [Siberian](/wiki/Siberia "Siberia") shamans, a central tree may
> be used as a ladder to ascend the heavens.[22]

Davidson says that the notion of an eagle atop a tree and the world serpent
coiled around the roots of the tree has parallels in other cosmologies from
[Asia](/wiki/Asia "Asia"). She goes on to say that Norse cosmology may have
been influenced by these Asiatic cosmologies from a northern location.
Davidson adds, on the other hand, that it is attested that the [Germanic
peoples](/wiki/Germanic\_people "Germanic people") worshiped their deities in
open forest clearings and that a [sky god](/wiki/Sky\_deity "Sky deity") was
particularly connected with the [oak](/wiki/Oak "Oak") tree, and therefore "a
central tree was a natural symbol for them also".[22]
