### Actors'
salaries[[edit](/w/index.php?title=The\_Big\_Bang\_Theory&action=edit&section=6
"Edit section: Actors' salaries")]

For the first three seasons, Galecki, Parsons, and Cuoco, the three main stars
of the show, received up to $60,000 per episode. Their salaries rose to
$200,000 per episode for the fourth season, then went up an additional $50,000
in each of the following three seasons, culminating in $350,000 per episode in
the seventh season.[60][61] In September 2013, Bialik and Rauch renegotiated
the contracts they held since they were introduced to the series in 2010. On
their old contracts, each was making $20,000–$30,000 per episode, while the
new contracts doubled that, beginning at $60,000 per episode, increasing
steadily to $100,000 per episode by the end of the contract, as well as adding
another year for both.[62]

By season seven, Galecki, Parsons, and Cuoco were also receiving 0.25 percent
of the series' back-end money. Before production began on the eighth season,
the three plus Helberg and Nayyar looked to renegotiate new contracts, with
Galecki, Parsons, and Cuoco seeking around $1 million per episode, as well as
more back-end money.[63] Contracts were signed in the beginning of August
2014, giving the three principal actors an estimated $1 million per episode
for three years, with the possibility to extend for a fourth year. The deals
also include larger pieces of the show, signing bonuses, production deals, and
advances towards the back-end.[64] Helberg and Nayyar were also able to
renegotiate their contracts, giving them a per-episode pay in the "mid-six-
figure range", up from around $100,000 per episode they each received in years
prior. The duo, who were looking to have salary parity with Parsons, Galecki,
and Cuoco, signed their contracts after the studio and producers threatened to
write the characters out of the series if a deal could not be reached before
the start of production on season eight.[65] By season 10, Helberg and Nayyar
reached the $1 million per episode parity with Galecki, Parsons, and Cuoco,
due to a clause in their deals signed in 2014.[66]

In March 2017, the main cast members (Galecki, Parsons, Cuoco, Helberg, and
Nayyar) took a 10 percent pay cut to allow Bialik and Rauch an increase in
their earnings.[67] This put Galecki, Parsons, Cuoco, Helberg and Nayyar at
$900,000 per episode, with Parsons, Galecki, and Helberg also receiving
overall deals with Warner Bros. Television.[49] By the end of April, Bialik
and Rauch had signed deals to earn $500,000 per episode each, with the deals
also including a separate development component for both actors. The deal was
an increase from the $175,000–$200,000 the duo had been making per
episode.[68]
