### Leonard and Penny's
relationship[[edit](/w/index.php?title=The\_Big\_Bang\_Theory&action=edit&section=10
"Edit section: Leonard and Penny's relationship")]

One of the recurring plot lines is the relationship between Leonard and Penny.
Leonard becomes attracted to Penny in the pilot episode, and his need to do
favors for her is a frequent point of humor in the first season. Meanwhile,
Penny dates a series of muscular, attractive, unintelligent, and insensitive
jocks. Their first long-term relationship begins when Leonard returns from a
three-month expedition to the [North Pole](/wiki/North\_Pole "North Pole") in
the season 3 premiere. However, when Leonard tells Penny that he loves her,
she realizes she cannot say it back, and they break up. Both Leonard and Penny
go on to date other people, most notably with Leonard dating Raj's sister
Priya for much of season 4. This relationship is jeopardized when Leonard
mistakenly comes to believe that Raj has slept with Penny, and it ultimately
ends when Priya sleeps with a former boyfriend in "[The Good Guy
Fluctuation](/wiki/The\_Good\_Guy\_Fluctuation "The Good Guy Fluctuation")".

Penny, who admits to missing Leonard in "[The Roommate
Transmogrification](/wiki/The\_Roommate\_Transmogrification "The Roommate
Transmogrification")", accepts his request to renew their relationship in
"[The Beta Test Initiation](/wiki/The\_Beta\_Test\_Initiation "The Beta Test
Initiation")". After Penny suggests having sex in "The Launch Acceleration",
Leonard breaks the mood by proposing to her. Penny says "no" but does not
break up with him. She stops a proposal a second time in "The Tangible
Affection Proof". In the sixth-season episode, "The 43 Peculiarity", Penny
finally tells Leonard that she loves him. Although they both feel jealousy
when the other receives significant attention from the opposite sex, Penny is
secure in their relationship, even when he leaves on a four-month expedition
to the [North Sea](/wiki/North\_Sea "North Sea") in "The Bon Voyage Reaction".
After he returns, the relationship blossoms over the seventh season. In the
penultimate episode "The Gorilla Dissolution", Penny admits that they should
marry and when Leonard realizes that she is serious, he proposes with a ring
that he has been carrying for years. Leonard and Penny decide to elope to Las
Vegas in the season 8 finale, but beforehand, wanting no secrets, Leonard
admits to kissing another woman, Mandy Chow ([Melissa Tang](/wiki/Melissa\_Tang
"Melissa Tang")) while on the expedition. Despite this, Leonard and Penny
finally marry in the season 9 premiere and remain happy. By the Season 9
finale, Penny and Leonard decide to have a second wedding ceremony for their
family and friends, to make up for eloping. In season 10, Sheldon moves into
Penny's old apartment with Amy, allowing Penny and Leonard to finally live on
their own as husband and wife.

In season 12, Penny announces that she does not want to have any children and
Leonard reluctantly supports her decision. Later, her old boyfriend Zack and
his new wife want Leonard to be a surrogate father to their kid since Zack is
infertile. Penny reluctantly agrees to let Leonard donate his sperm. However,
when she tries to seduce Leonard despite knowing he has to be abstinent for a
few days, her visiting father, Wyatt, points out to Penny that her own actions
suggest she is more conflicted over having kids than she lets on, and she
admits she feels bad about letting him and Leonard down if she never has
children. He says that despite her flaws, parenthood is the best thing that
ever happened to him, and he does not want her to miss out, but that he will
support her no matter what she does. Leonard eventually changes his mind, not
wanting a child in the world that he cannot raise. In the series finale, Penny
is pregnant with Leonard's baby, and she has changed her mind about not
wanting children.
