### Urbanisation of local cassowary
population[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Cassowary&action=edit&section=14 "Edit
section: Urbanisation of local cassowary population")]

In extremely urbanised areas where Cassowaries used to naturally live such as
in Queensland, Australia or in Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea, the local
Cassowary population had adapted to its less forested grounds. Increasing
urbanisation has increased the likelihood of human-cassowary interaction, a
potentially dangerous mix.[76] Although cassowary populations have faced
challenges in these urban areas in Northeastern Australia and parts of New
Guinea, the cassowaries have proven to be surprisingly quite adaptable in
contrast to the [Kiwis](/wiki/Kiwi\_\(bird\) "Kiwi \(bird\)") of [New
Zealand](/wiki/New\_Zealand "New Zealand"), making them the largest and most
urbanised birds in the world.

It was found that cassowaries in these urban environments changed their diets
accordingly, with urbanised cassowaries actually consuming an even greater
proportion of fruits from exotic plants (~30%) but still incorporating a
significant proportion of fruits from native plants in their diet.[77]
Likewise, as aforementioned, the high concentration of human activity in the
urban ecology also equates to a higher concentration of food diversity and
food waste, with these 'urbanised' cassowaries foraging for food scraps, bird
feeders and outdoor picnic/food venues without fear from humans or
domesticated animals due to the birds' size and reputation.[43]

Due to their omnivorous nature, cassowaries are able to eat all types of human
food, including processed ones if they feel like it, although fruit still
remains their favourite choosings.[43][78] The high concentration of human
activity as well as vehicles, mixed with domesticated animals and less forest
coverage, had also changed their behaviours. These 'city' cassowaries were
shown to exist in a higher state of activity and rested less than individuals
inhabiting more intact swathes of rainforest, actively moving between urban
gardens and the rainforest.[77] The study give evidence that these birds
showed a surprising amount of flexible foraging strategy that has enabled them
to persist in rainforest-fragmented landscapes.[77]
