## Philosophy[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Physics&action=edit&section=7 "Edit
section: Philosophy")]

Main article: [Philosophy of physics](/wiki/Philosophy\_of\_physics "Philosophy
of physics")

In many ways, physics stems from [ancient Greek
philosophy](/wiki/Ancient\_Greek\_philosophy "Ancient Greek philosophy"). From
[Thales](/wiki/Thales\_of\_Miletus "Thales of Miletus")' first attempt to
characterize matter, to [Democritus](/wiki/Democritus "Democritus")' deduction
that matter ought to reduce to an invariant state to the [Ptolemaic
astronomy](/wiki/Ptolemaic\_astronomy "Ptolemaic astronomy") of a crystalline
[firmament](/wiki/Firmament "Firmament"), and Aristotle's book
\_[Physics](/wiki/Physics\_\(Aristotle\) "Physics \(Aristotle\)")\_ (an early
book on physics, which attempted to analyze and define motion from a
philosophical point of view), various Greek philosophers advanced their own
theories of nature. Physics was known as natural philosophy until the late
18th century.[c]

By the 19th century, physics was realized as a discipline distinct from
philosophy and the other sciences. Physics, as with the rest of science,
relies on [philosophy of science](/wiki/Philosophy\_of\_science "Philosophy of
science") and its "[scientific method](/wiki/Scientific\_method "Scientific
method")" to advance knowledge of the physical world.[40] The scientific
method employs \_[a priori reasoning](/wiki/A\_priori\_and\_a\_posteriori "A priori
and a posteriori")\_ as well as \_[a posteriori](/wiki/Empirical\_evidence
"Empirical evidence")\_ reasoning and the use of [Bayesian
inference](/wiki/Bayesian\_inference "Bayesian inference") to measure the
validity of a given theory.[41]

The development of physics has answered many questions of early philosophers
and has raised new questions. Study of the philosophical issues surrounding
physics, the [philosophy of physics](/wiki/Philosophy\_of\_physics "Philosophy
of physics"), involves issues such as the nature of [space](/wiki/Space
"Space") and time, [determinism](/wiki/Determinism "Determinism"), and
[metaphysical](/wiki/Metaphysics "Metaphysics") outlooks such as
[empiricism](/wiki/Empiricism "Empiricism"),
[naturalism](/wiki/Naturalism\_\(philosophy\) "Naturalism \(philosophy\)") and
[realism](/wiki/Philosophical\_realism "Philosophical realism").[42]

Many physicists have written about the philosophical implications of their
work, for instance [Laplace](/wiki/Pierre-Simon\_Laplace "Pierre-Simon
Laplace"), who championed [causal determinism](/wiki/Causal\_determinism
"Causal determinism"),[43] and [Erwin
Schrödinger](/wiki/Erwin\_Schr%C3%B6dinger "Erwin Schrödinger"), who wrote on
quantum mechanics.[44][45] The mathematical physicist [Roger
Penrose](/wiki/Roger\_Penrose "Roger Penrose") has been called a
[Platonist](/wiki/Platonism "Platonism") by [Stephen
Hawking](/wiki/Stephen\_Hawking "Stephen Hawking"),[46] a view Penrose
discusses in his book, \_[The Road to Reality](/wiki/The\_Road\_to\_Reality "The
Road to Reality")\_.[47] Hawking referred to himself as an "unashamed
reductionist" and took issue with Penrose's views.[48]
