### Quantum field
theory[[edit](/w/index.php?title=History\_of\_physics&action=edit&section=30
"Edit section: Quantum field theory")]

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/1f/Feynmann\_Diagram\_Gluon\_Radiation.svg/287px-
Feynmann\_Diagram\_Gluon\_Radiation.svg.png)](/wiki/File:Feynmann\_Diagram\_Gluon\_Radiation.svg)A
[Feynman diagram](/wiki/Feynman\_diagram "Feynman diagram") representing (left
to right) the production of a photon (blue [sine wave](/wiki/Sine\_wave "Sine
wave")) from the [annihilation](/wiki/Annihilation "Annihilation") of an
electron and its complementary [antiparticle](/wiki/Antiparticle
"Antiparticle"), the [positron](/wiki/Positron "Positron"). The photon becomes
a [quark](/wiki/Quark "Quark")–[antiquark](/wiki/Antiquark "Antiquark") pair
and a [gluon](/wiki/Gluon "Gluon") (green spiral) is released.
[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f9/Feynman-
richard\_p.jpg/220px-Feynman-richard\_p.jpg)](/wiki/File:Feynman-
richard\_p.jpg)[Richard Feynman](/wiki/Richard\_Feynman "Richard Feynman")'s Los
Alamos ID badge

As the philosophically inclined continued to debate the fundamental nature of
the universe, quantum theories continued to be produced, beginning with [Paul
Dirac](/wiki/Paul\_Dirac "Paul Dirac")'s formulation of a relativistic quantum
theory in 1928. However, attempts to quantize electromagnetic theory entirely
were stymied throughout the 1930s by theoretical formulations yielding
infinite energies. This situation was not considered adequately resolved until
after [World War II](/wiki/World\_War\_II "World War II") ended, when [Julian
Schwinger](/wiki/Julian\_Schwinger "Julian Schwinger"), [Richard
Feynman](/wiki/Richard\_Feynman "Richard Feynman") and [Sin-Itiro
Tomonaga](/wiki/Sin-Itiro\_Tomonaga "Sin-Itiro Tomonaga") independently posited
the technique of [renormalization](/wiki/Renormalization "Renormalization"),
which allowed for an establishment of a robust [quantum
electrodynamics](/wiki/Quantum\_electrodynamics "Quantum electrodynamics")
(QED).[67]

Meanwhile, new theories of [fundamental particles](/wiki/Elementary\_particle
"Elementary particle") proliferated with the rise of the idea of the
[quantization of fields](/wiki/Quantum\_field\_theory "Quantum field theory")
through "[exchange forces](/wiki/Exchange\_interaction "Exchange interaction")"
regulated by an exchange of short-lived ["virtual"
particles](/wiki/Virtual\_particle "Virtual particle"), which were allowed to
exist according to the laws governing the uncertainties inherent in the
quantum world. Notably, [Hideki Yukawa](/wiki/Hideki\_Yukawa "Hideki Yukawa")
proposed that the positive charges of the [nucleus](/wiki/Atomic\_nucleus
"Atomic nucleus") were kept together courtesy of a powerful but short-range
force mediated by a particle with a mass between that of the electron and
[proton](/wiki/Proton "Proton"). This particle, the "[pion](/wiki/Pion
"Pion")", was identified in 1947 as part of what became a slew of particles
discovered after World War II. Initially, such particles were found as
[ionizing radiation](/wiki/Ionization "Ionization") left by [cosmic
rays](/wiki/Cosmic\_ray "Cosmic ray"), but increasingly came to be produced in
newer and more powerful [particle accelerators](/wiki/Particle\_accelerator
"Particle accelerator").[68]

Outside particle physics, significant advances of the time were:

 \* the invention of the [laser](/wiki/Laser "Laser") (1964 [Nobel Prize in Physics](/wiki/Nobel\_Prize\_in\_Physics "Nobel Prize in Physics"));
 \* the theoretical and experimental research of [superconductivity](/wiki/Superconductivity "Superconductivity"), especially the invention of a [quantum theory of superconductivity](/wiki/Ginzburg%E2%80%93Landau\_theory "Ginzburg–Landau theory") by [Vitaly Ginzburg](/wiki/Vitaly\_Ginzburg "Vitaly Ginzburg") and [Lev Landau](/wiki/Lev\_Landau "Lev Landau") (1962 Nobel Prize in Physics) and, later, its explanation via [Cooper pairs](/wiki/Cooper\_pair "Cooper pair") (1972 Nobel Prize in Physics). The Cooper pair was an early example of [quasiparticles](/wiki/Quasiparticle "Quasiparticle").
