## General
relativity[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Theory\_of\_relativity&action=edit&section=3
"Edit section: General relativity")]

Main articles: [General relativity](/wiki/General\_relativity "General
relativity") and [Introduction to general
relativity](/wiki/Introduction\_to\_general\_relativity "Introduction to general
relativity")

General relativity is a theory of gravitation developed by Einstein in the
years 1907â€“1915. The development of general relativity began with the
[equivalence principle](/wiki/Equivalence\_principle "Equivalence principle"),
under which the states of [accelerated motion](/wiki/Accelerated\_motion
"Accelerated motion") and being at rest in a [gravitational
field](/wiki/Gravity "Gravity") (for example, when standing on the surface of
the Earth) are physically identical. The upshot of this is that [free
fall](/wiki/Free\_fall "Free fall") is [inertial motion](/wiki/Inertia
"Inertia"): an object in free fall is falling because that is how objects move
when there is no [force](/wiki/Force "Force") being exerted on them, instead
of this being due to the force of [gravity](/wiki/Gravity "Gravity") as is the
case in [classical mechanics](/wiki/Classical\_mechanics "Classical
mechanics"). This is incompatible with classical mechanics and [special
relativity](/wiki/Special\_relativity "Special relativity") because in those
theories inertially moving objects cannot accelerate with respect to each
other, but objects in free fall do so. To resolve this difficulty Einstein
first proposed that [spacetime is curved](/wiki/Curved\_space "Curved space").
Einstein discussed his idea with mathematician [Marcel
Grossmann](/wiki/Marcel\_Grossmann "Marcel Grossmann") and they concluded that
general relativity could be formulated in the context of [Riemannian
geometry](/wiki/Riemannian\_geometry "Riemannian geometry") which had been
developed in the 1800s.[10] In 1915, he devised the [Einstein field
equations](/wiki/Einstein\_field\_equations "Einstein field equations") which
relate the curvature of spacetime with the mass, energy, and any momentum
within it.

Some of the consequences of general relativity are:

 \* [Gravitational time dilation](/wiki/Gravitational\_time\_dilation "Gravitational time dilation"): Clocks run slower in deeper gravitational wells.[11]
 \* [Precession](/wiki/Precession#Relativistic\_\(Einsteinian\) "Precession"): Orbits precess in a way unexpected in Newton's theory of gravity. (This has been observed in the orbit of [Mercury](/wiki/Mercury\_\(planet\) "Mercury \(planet\)") and in [binary pulsars](/wiki/Binary\_pulsar "Binary pulsar")).
 \* [Light deflection](/wiki/General\_relativity#Light\_deflection\_and\_gravitational\_time\_delay "General relativity"): Rays of [light](/wiki/Light "Light") bend in the presence of a gravitational field.
 \* [Frame-dragging](/wiki/Frame-dragging "Frame-dragging"): Rotating masses "drag along" the [spacetime](/wiki/Spacetime "Spacetime") around them.
 \* [Expansion of the universe](/wiki/Expansion\_of\_the\_universe "Expansion of the universe"): The universe is expanding, and certain components within the universe can [accelerate the expansion](/wiki/Accelerated\_expansion "Accelerated expansion").

Technically, general relativity is a theory of [gravitation](/wiki/Gravitation
"Gravitation") whose defining feature is its use of the [Einstein field
equations](/wiki/Einstein\_field\_equations "Einstein field equations"). The
solutions of the field equations are [metric
tensors](/wiki/Metric\_tensor\_\(general\_relativity\) "Metric tensor \(general
relativity\)") which define the [topology](/wiki/Topology "Topology") of the
spacetime and how objects move inertially.
