### Birth and early
developments[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Game\_theory&action=edit&section=4 "Edit
section: Birth and early developments")]

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5e/JohnvonNeumann-
LosAlamos.gif/170px-JohnvonNeumann-LosAlamos.gif)](/wiki/File:JohnvonNeumann-
LosAlamos.gif)[John von Neumann](/wiki/John\_von\_Neumann "John von Neumann")

Game theory emerged as a unique field when John von Neumann published the
paper \_On the Theory of Games of Strategy\_ in 1928.[12][13] Von Neumann's
original proof used [Brouwer's fixed-point theorem](/wiki/Brouwer%27s\_fixed-
point\_theorem "Brouwer's fixed-point theorem") on continuous
[mappings](/wiki/Map\_\(mathematics\) "Map \(mathematics\)") into compact
[convex sets](/wiki/Convex\_set "Convex set"), which became a standard method
in game theory and [mathematical economics](/wiki/Mathematical\_economics
"Mathematical economics"). Von Neumann's work in game theory culminated in his
1944 book \_[Theory of Games and Economic
Behavior](/wiki/Theory\_of\_Games\_and\_Economic\_Behavior "Theory of Games and
Economic Behavior")\_ , co-authored with [Oskar
Morgenstern](/wiki/Oskar\_Morgenstern "Oskar Morgenstern").[14] The second
edition of this book provided an [axiomatic theory of
utility](/wiki/Axiomatic\_set\_theory "Axiomatic set theory"), which
reincarnated [Daniel Bernoulli's](/wiki/Daniel\_Bernoulli "Daniel Bernoulli")
old theory of utility (of money) as an independent discipline. This
foundational work contains the method for finding mutually consistent
solutions for two-person zero-sum games. Subsequent work focused primarily on
[cooperative game](/wiki/Cooperative\_game\_theory "Cooperative game theory")
theory, which analyzes optimal strategies for groups of individuals, presuming
that they can enforce agreements between them about proper strategies.[15]

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/91/John\_f\_nash\_20061102\_3.jpg/170px-
John\_f\_nash\_20061102\_3.jpg)](/wiki/File:John\_f\_nash\_20061102\_3.jpg)[John
Nash](/wiki/John\_Forbes\_Nash\_Jr. "John Forbes Nash Jr.")

In 1950, the first mathematical discussion of the [prisoner's
dilemma](/wiki/Prisoner%27s\_dilemma "Prisoner's dilemma") appeared, and an
experiment was undertaken by notable mathematicians [Merrill M.
Flood](/wiki/Merrill\_M.\_Flood "Merrill M. Flood") and [Melvin
Dresher](/wiki/Melvin\_Dresher "Melvin Dresher"), as part of the [RAND
Corporation](/wiki/RAND\_Corporation "RAND Corporation")'s investigations into
game theory. RAND pursued the studies because of possible applications to
global [nuclear strategy](/wiki/Nuclear\_strategy "Nuclear strategy").[16]
Around this same time, [John Nash](/wiki/John\_Forbes\_Nash "John Forbes Nash")
developed a criterion for mutual consistency of players' strategies known as
the [Nash equilibrium](/wiki/Nash\_equilibrium "Nash equilibrium"), applicable
to a wider variety of games than the criterion proposed by von Neumann and
Morgenstern. Nash proved that every finite n-player, non-zero-sum (not just
two-player zero-sum) [non-cooperative game](/wiki/Non-cooperative\_game "Non-
cooperative game") has what is now known as a Nash equilibrium in mixed
strategies.

Game theory experienced a flurry of activity in the 1950s, during which the
concepts of the [core](/wiki/Core\_\(economics\) "Core \(economics\)"), the
[extensive form game](/wiki/Extensive\_form\_game "Extensive form game"),
[fictitious play](/wiki/Fictitious\_play "Fictitious play"), [repeated
games](/wiki/Repeated\_game "Repeated game"), and the [Shapley
value](/wiki/Shapley\_value "Shapley value") were developed. The 1950s also saw
the first applications of game theory to [philosophy](/wiki/Philosophy
"Philosophy") and [political science](/wiki/Political\_science "Political
science").
