### \_Prose Edda\_[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Yggdrasil&action=edit&section=7
"Edit section: Prose Edda")]

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/c3/The\_Tree\_of\_Yggdrasil.jpg/220px-
The\_Tree\_of\_Yggdrasil.jpg)](/wiki/File:The\_Tree\_of\_Yggdrasil.jpg)The title
page of Olive Bray's 1908 translation of the \_Poetic Edda\_ by [W. G.
Collingwood](/wiki/W.\_G.\_Collingwood "W. G. Collingwood")
[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/48/Die\_Nornen\_Urd%2C\_Werdanda%2C\_Skuld%2C\_unter\_der\_Welteiche\_Yggdrasil\_by\_Ludwig\_Burger.jpg/220px-
Die\_Nornen\_Urd%2C\_Werdanda%2C\_Skuld%2C\_unter\_der\_Welteiche\_Yggdrasil\_by\_Ludwig\_Burger.jpg)](/wiki/File:Die\_Nornen\_Urd,\_Werdanda,\_Skuld,\_unter\_der\_Welteiche\_Yggdrasil\_by\_Ludwig\_Burger.jpg)The
norns Urðr, Verðandi, and Skuld beneath the world tree Yggdrasil (1882) by
[Ludwig Burger](/wiki/Ludwig\_Burger "Ludwig Burger").

Yggdrasil is mentioned in two books in the \_[Prose Edda](/wiki/Prose\_Edda
"Prose Edda")\_ ; \_[Gylfaginning](/wiki/Gylfaginning "Gylfaginning")\_ and
\_[Skáldskaparmál](/wiki/Sk%C3%A1ldskaparm%C3%A1l "Skáldskaparmál")\_. In
\_Gylfaginning\_ , Yggdrasil is introduced in chapter 15. In chapter 15,
[Gangleri](/wiki/Gylfi "Gylfi") (described as king [Gylfi](/wiki/Gylfi
"Gylfi") in disguise) asks where is the chief or holiest place of the gods.
[High](/wiki/High,\_Just-As-High,\_and\_Third "High, Just-As-High, and Third")
replies "It is the ash Yggdrasil. There the gods must hold their courts each
day". Gangleri asks what there is to tell about Yggdrasil. [Just-As-
High](/wiki/High,\_Just-As-High,\_and\_Third "High, Just-As-High, and Third")
says that Yggdrasil is the biggest and best of all trees, that its branches
extend out over all of the world and reach out over the sky. Three of the
roots of the tree support it, and these three roots also extend extremely far:
one "is among the [Æsir](/wiki/%C3%86sir "Æsir"), the second among the frost
jötnar, and the third over [Niflheim](/wiki/Niflheim "Niflheim"). The root
over Niflheim is gnawed at by the wyrm
[Níðhöggr](/wiki/N%C3%AD%C3%B0h%C3%B6ggr "Níðhöggr"), and beneath this root is
the spring [Hvergelmir](/wiki/Hvergelmir "Hvergelmir"). Beneath the root that
reaches the frost jötnar is the well [Mímisbrunnr](/wiki/M%C3%ADmisbrunnr
"Mímisbrunnr"), "which has wisdom and intelligence contained in it, and the
master of the well is called [Mimir](/wiki/M%C3%ADmir "Mímir")". Just-As-High
provides details regarding Mímisbrunnr and then describes that the third root
of the well "extends to heaven" and that beneath the root is the "very holy"
well [Urðarbrunnr](/wiki/Ur%C3%B0arbrunnr "Urðarbrunnr"). At Urðarbrunnr the
gods hold their court, and every day the Æsir ride to Urðarbrunnr up over the
bridge [Bifröst](/wiki/Bifr%C3%B6st "Bifröst"). Later in the chapter, a stanza
from \_Grímnismál\_ mentioning Yggdrasil is quoted in support.[17]

In chapter 16, Gangleri asks "what other particularly notable things are there
to tell about the ash?" High says there is quite a lot to tell about. High
continues that an eagle sits on the branches of Yggdrasil and that it has much
knowledge. Between the eyes of the eagle sits a hawk called
[Veðrfölnir](/wiki/Ve%C3%B0rf%C3%B6lnir "Veðrfölnir"). A squirrel called
[Ratatoskr](/wiki/Ratatoskr "Ratatoskr") scurries up and down the ash
Yggdrasil carrying "malicious messages" between the eagle and Níðhöggr. Four
stags named Dáinn, Dvalinn, Duneyrr, and Duraþrór run between the branches of
Yggdrasil and consume its foliage. In the spring Hvergelmir are so many snakes
along with Níðhöggr "that no tongue can enumerate them". Two stanzas from
\_Grímnismál\_ are then cited in support. High continues that the norns that
live by the holy well Urðarbrunnr each day take water from the well and mud
from around it and pour it over Yggdrasil so that the branches of the ash do
not rot away or decay. High provides more information about Urðarbrunnr, cites
a stanza from \_Völuspá\_ in support, and adds that [dew](/wiki/Dew "Dew") falls
from Yggdrasil to the earth, explaining that "this is what people call
[honeydew](/wiki/Honeydew\_\(secretion\) "Honeydew \(secretion\)"), and from it
bees feed".[18]

In chapter 41, the stanza from \_Grímnismál\_ is quoted that mentions that
Yggdrasil is the foremost of trees.[19] In chapter 54, as part of the events
of [Ragnarök](/wiki/Ragnar%C3%B6k "Ragnarök"), High describes that Odin will
ride to the well Mímisbrunnr and consult Mímir on behalf of himself and his
people. After this, "the ash Yggdrasil will shake and nothing will be unafraid
in heaven or on earth", and then the Æsir and [Einherjar](/wiki/Einherjar
"Einherjar") will don their war gear and advance to the field of
[Vígríðr](/wiki/V%C3%ADgr%C3%AD%C3%B0r "Vígríðr"). Further into the chapter,
the stanza in \_Völuspá\_ that details this sequence is cited.[20]

In the \_Prose Edda\_ book \_[Skáldskaparmál](/wiki/Sk%C3%A1ldskaparm%C3%A1l
"Skáldskaparmál")\_ , Yggdrasil receives a single mention, though not by name.
In chapter 64, names for [kings](/wiki/King "King") and [dukes](/wiki/Duke
"Duke") are given. "Illustrious one" is provided as an example, appearing in a
Christianity-influenced work by the [skald](/wiki/Skald "Skald") [Hallvarðr
Háreksblesi](/wiki/Hallvar%C3%B0r\_H%C3%A1reksblesi "Hallvarðr Háreksblesi"):
"There is not under the pole of the earth [Yggdrasil] an illustrious one
closer to the lord of [monks](/wiki/Monk "Monk") [God] than you."[21]
