### Nicolaus
Copernicus[[edit](/w/index.php?title=History\_of\_physics&action=edit&section=7
"Edit section: Nicolaus Copernicus")]

Main articles: [Nicolaus Copernicus](/wiki/Nicolaus\_Copernicus "Nicolaus
Copernicus"), [Tycho Brahe](/wiki/Tycho\_Brahe "Tycho Brahe"), and [Johannes
Kepler](/wiki/Johannes\_Kepler "Johannes Kepler")

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f2/Nikolaus\_Kopernikus.jpg/200px-
Nikolaus\_Kopernikus.jpg)](/wiki/File:Nikolaus\_Kopernikus.jpg)The Polish
astronomer [Nicolaus Copernicus](/wiki/Nicolaus\_Copernicus "Nicolaus
Copernicus") (1473–1543) is remembered for his development of a
[heliocentric](/wiki/Heliocentrism "Heliocentrism") model of the [Solar
System](/wiki/Solar\_System "Solar System").

A breakthrough in [astronomy](/wiki/Astronomy "Astronomy") was made by Polish
astronomer [Nicolaus Copernicus](/wiki/Nicolaus\_Copernicus "Nicolaus
Copernicus") (1473–1543) when, in 1543, he gave strong arguments for the
heliocentric model of the Solar System, ostensibly as a means to render tables
charting planetary motion more accurate and to simplify their production. In
heliocentric models of the Solar system, the Earth orbits the Sun along with
other bodies in [Earth's](/wiki/Milky\_Way "Milky Way") [galaxy](/wiki/Galaxy
"Galaxy"), a contradiction according to the Greek-Egyptian astronomer Ptolemy
(2nd century CE; see above), [whose system](/wiki/Ptolemaic\_system "Ptolemaic
system") placed the Earth at the center of the Universe and had been accepted
for over 1,400 years. The Greek astronomer [Aristarchus of
Samos](/wiki/Aristarchus\_of\_Samos "Aristarchus of Samos") (c. 310 – c. 230
BCE) had suggested that the Earth revolves around the Sun, but Copernicus'
reasoning led to lasting general acceptance of this "revolutionary" idea.
Copernicus' book presenting the theory (\_[De revolutionibus orbium
coelestium](/wiki/De\_revolutionibus\_orbium\_coelestium "De revolutionibus
orbium coelestium")\_ , "On the Revolutions of the Celestial Spheres") was
published just before his death in 1543 and, as it is now generally considered
to mark the beginning of modern astronomy, is also considered to mark the
beginning of the Scientific Revolution.[\_[citation
needed](/wiki/Wikipedia:Citation\_needed "Wikipedia:Citation needed")\_]
Copernicus' new perspective, along with the accurate observations made by
[Tycho Brahe](/wiki/Tycho\_Brahe "Tycho Brahe"), enabled German astronomer
[Johannes Kepler](/wiki/Johannes\_Kepler "Johannes Kepler") (1571–1630) to
formulate [his laws regarding planetary
motion](/wiki/Kepler%27s\_laws\_of\_planetary\_motion "Kepler's laws of planetary
motion") that remain in use today.
