#### Nuclear and
particle[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Physics&action=edit&section=21 "Edit
section: Nuclear and particle")]

Main articles: [Particle physics](/wiki/Particle\_physics "Particle physics")
and [Nuclear physics](/wiki/Nuclear\_physics "Nuclear physics")

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/1c/CMS\_Higgs-
event.jpg/220px-CMS\_Higgs-event.jpg)](/wiki/File:CMS\_Higgs-event.jpg)A
simulated event in the CMS detector of the [Large Hadron
Collider](/wiki/Large\_Hadron\_Collider "Large Hadron Collider"), featuring a
possible appearance of the [Higgs boson](/wiki/Higgs\_boson "Higgs boson")

Particle physics is the study of the elementary constituents of
[matter](/wiki/Matter "Matter") and energy and the
[interactions](/wiki/Fundamental\_interaction "Fundamental interaction")
between them.[68] In addition, particle physicists design and develop the
high-energy accelerators,[69] detectors,[70] and [computer
programs](/wiki/Computational\_particle\_physics "Computational particle
physics")[71] necessary for this research. The field is also called "high-
energy physics" because many elementary particles do not occur naturally but
are created only during high-energy [collisions](/wiki/Collision "Collision")
of other particles.[72]

Currently, the interactions of elementary particles and
[fields](/wiki/Field\_\(physics\) "Field \(physics\)") are described by the
[Standard Model](/wiki/Standard\_Model "Standard Model").[73] The model
accounts for the 12 known particles of matter ([quarks](/wiki/Quark "Quark")
and [leptons](/wiki/Lepton "Lepton")) that interact via the
[strong](/wiki/Strong\_nuclear\_force "Strong nuclear force"), weak, and
electromagnetic [fundamental forces](/wiki/Fundamental\_force "Fundamental
force").[73] Dynamics are described in terms of matter particles exchanging
[gauge bosons](/wiki/Gauge\_boson "Gauge boson") ([gluons](/wiki/Gluon
"Gluon"), [W and Z bosons](/wiki/W\_and\_Z\_bosons "W and Z bosons"), and
[photons](/wiki/Photon "Photon"), respectively).[74] The Standard Model also
predicts a particle known as the Higgs boson.[73] In July 2012 CERN, the
European laboratory for particle physics, announced the detection of a
particle consistent with the Higgs boson,[75] an integral part of the [Higgs
mechanism](/wiki/Higgs\_mechanism "Higgs mechanism").

Nuclear physics is the field of physics that studies the constituents and
interactions of [atomic nuclei](/wiki/Atomic\_nuclei "Atomic nuclei"). The most
commonly known applications of nuclear physics are [nuclear
power](/wiki/Nuclear\_power "Nuclear power") generation and [nuclear
weapons](/wiki/Nuclear\_weapons "Nuclear weapons") technology, but the research
has provided application in many fields, including those in [nuclear
medicine](/wiki/Nuclear\_medicine "Nuclear medicine") and magnetic resonance
imaging, [ion implantation](/wiki/Ion\_implantation "Ion implantation") in
[materials engineering](/wiki/Materials\_engineering "Materials engineering"),
and [radiocarbon dating](/wiki/Radiocarbon\_dating "Radiocarbon dating") in
geology and [archaeology](/wiki/Archaeology "Archaeology").
