##
Viability[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Conspiracy\_theory&action=edit&section=29
"Edit section: Viability")]

As evidence that undermines an alleged conspiracy grows, the number of alleged
conspirators also grows in the minds of conspiracy theorists. This is because
of an assumption that the alleged conspirators often have competing interests.
For example, if Republican President [George W. Bush](/wiki/George\_W.\_Bush
"George W. Bush") is allegedly responsible for the 9/11 terrorist attacks, and
the Democratic party did not pursue exposing this alleged plot, that must mean
that both the Democratic and Republican parties are conspirators in the
alleged plot. It also assumes that the alleged conspirators are so competent
that they can fool the entire world, but so incompetent that even the
unskilled conspiracy theorists can find mistakes they make that prove the
fraud. At some point, the number of alleged conspirators, combined with the
contradictions within the alleged conspirators' interests and competence,
becomes so great that maintaining the theory becomes an obvious exercise in
absurdity.[148]

The physicist [David Robert Grimes](/wiki/David\_Robert\_Grimes "David Robert
Grimes") estimated the time it would take for a conspiracy to be exposed based
on the number of people involved.[149][150] His calculations used data from
the [PRISM surveillance program](/wiki/PRISM\_\(surveillance\_program\) "PRISM
\(surveillance program\)"), the [Tuskegee syphilis
experiment](/wiki/Tuskegee\_syphilis\_experiment "Tuskegee syphilis
experiment"), and the [FBI forensic scandal](/wiki/FBI\_Laboratory#Controversy
"FBI Laboratory"). Grimes estimated that:

 \* A [Moon landing hoax](/wiki/Moon\_landing\_conspiracy\_theories "Moon landing conspiracy theories") would require the involvement of 411,000 people and would be exposed within 3.68 years;
 \* [Climate-change fraud](/wiki/Global\_warming\_conspiracy\_theory "Global warming conspiracy theory") would require a minimum of 29,083 people (published climate scientists only) and would be exposed within 26.77 years, or up to 405,000 people, in which case it would be exposed within 3.70 years;
 \* A vaccination conspiracy would require a minimum of 22,000 people (without drug companies) and would be exposed within at least 3.15 years and at most 34.78 years depending on the number involved;
 \* A conspiracy to [suppress a cure for cancer](/wiki/Big\_Pharma\_conspiracy\_theory "Big Pharma conspiracy theory") would require 714,000 people and would be exposed within 3.17 years.

Grimes's study did not consider exposure by sources outside of the alleged
conspiracy. It only considered exposure from within the alleged conspiracy
through whistleblowers or through incompetence.[151] Subsequent comments on
the [PubPeer](/wiki/PubPeer "PubPeer")
[website](https://pubpeer.com/publications/48DA2B5CAAD0374925C844B5377DF1)
point out that these calculations must exclude successful conspiracies since,
by definition, we don't know about them, and are wrong by an order of
magnitude about [Bletchley Park](/wiki/Bletchley\_Park "Bletchley Park"), which
remained a secret far longer than Grimes' calculations predicted.
