#### Phases of
Venus[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Galileo\_Galilei&action=edit&section=10 "Edit
section: Phases of Venus")]

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/c/c2/Phases-of-
Venus2.svg/200px-Phases-of-Venus2.svg.png)](/wiki/File:Phases-of-Venus2.svg)

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/a1/Phases-of-Venus-
Geocentric.svg/200px-Phases-of-Venus-Geocentric.svg.png)](/wiki/File:Phases-
of-Venus-Geocentric.svg)

In 1610 Galileo Galilei observed with his telescope that [Venus showed
phases](/wiki/Phases\_of\_Venus "Phases of Venus"), despite remaining near the
Sun in Earth's sky (first image). This proved that it orbits the
[Sun](/wiki/Sun "Sun") and not [Earth](/wiki/Earth "Earth"), as predicted by
[Copernicus](/wiki/Copernicus "Copernicus")'s [heliocentric
model](/wiki/Heliocentric\_model "Heliocentric model") and disproved the then
conventional [geocentric model](/wiki/Geocentric\_model "Geocentric model")
(second image).

From September 1610, Galileo observed that [Venus](/wiki/Venus "Venus")
exhibits [a full set of phases](/wiki/Phases\_of\_Venus "Phases of Venus")
similar to [that of the Moon](/wiki/Lunar\_phase "Lunar phase"). The
[heliocentric model](/wiki/Heliocentric\_model "Heliocentric model") of the
[Solar System](/wiki/Solar\_System "Solar System") developed by [Nicolaus
Copernicus](/wiki/Nicolaus\_Copernicus "Nicolaus Copernicus") predicted that
all phases would be visible since the orbit of Venus around the
[Sun](/wiki/Sun "Sun") would cause its illuminated hemisphere to face the
Earth when it was on the opposite side of the Sun and to face away from the
Earth when it was on the Earth-side of the Sun. In [Ptolemy's geocentric
model](/wiki/Geocentric\_model#Ptolemaic\_model "Geocentric model"), it was
impossible for any of the planets' orbits to intersect the spherical shell
carrying the Sun. Traditionally, the orbit of Venus was placed entirely on the
near side of the Sun, where it could exhibit only crescent and new phases. It
was also possible to place it entirely on the far side of the Sun, where it
could exhibit only gibbous and full phases. After Galileo's telescopic
observations of the crescent, gibbous and full phases of Venus, the Ptolemaic
model became untenable. In the early 17th century, as a result of his
discovery, the great majority of astronomers converted to one of the various
geo-heliocentric planetary models,[64][65] such as the
[Tychonic](/wiki/Tychonic\_system "Tychonic system"),
[Capellan](/wiki/Martianus\_Capella "Martianus Capella") and Extended Capellan
models,[b] each either with or without a daily rotating Earth. These all
explained the phases of Venus without the 'refutation' of full heliocentrism's
prediction of stellar parallax. Galileo's discovery of the phases of Venus was
thus his most empirically practically influential contribution to the two-
stage transition from full geocentrism to full heliocentrism via geo-
heliocentrism.[\_[citation needed](/wiki/Wikipedia:Citation\_needed
"Wikipedia:Citation needed")\_]
