### Physical
sciences[[edit](/w/index.php?title=History\_of\_physics&action=edit&section=35
"Edit section: Physical sciences")]

With increased accessibility to and elaboration upon advanced analytical
techniques in the 19th century, physics was defined as much, if not more, by
those techniques than by the search for universal principles of motion and
energy, and the fundamental nature of matter. Fields such as
[acoustics](/wiki/Acoustics "Acoustics"), [geophysics](/wiki/Geophysics
"Geophysics"), [astrophysics](/wiki/Astrophysics "Astrophysics"),
[aerodynamics](/wiki/Aerodynamics "Aerodynamics"), [plasma
physics](/wiki/Plasma\_\(physics\) "Plasma \(physics\)"), [low-temperature
physics](/wiki/Cryogenics "Cryogenics"), and [solid-state
physics](/wiki/Solid-state\_physics "Solid-state physics") joined optics,
[fluid dynamics](/wiki/Fluid\_dynamics "Fluid dynamics"),
[electromagnetism](/wiki/Electromagnetism "Electromagnetism"), and
[mechanics](/wiki/Mechanics "Mechanics") as areas of physical research. In the
20th century, physics also became closely allied with such fields as
[electrical](/wiki/Electrical\_engineering "Electrical engineering"),
[aerospace](/wiki/Aerospace\_engineering "Aerospace engineering") and
[materials](/wiki/Materials\_science "Materials science") engineering, and
physicists began to work in government and industrial laboratories as much as
in academic settings. Following World War II, the population of physicists
increased dramatically, and came to be centered on the United States, while,
in more recent decades, physics has become a more international pursuit than
at any time in its previous history.
