### The Great
Filter[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Great\_Filter&action=edit&section=3 "Edit
section: The Great Filter")]

With no evidence of intelligent life in places other than Earth, it appears
that the process of starting with a star and ending with "advanced explosive
lasting life" must be unlikely. This implies that at least one step in this
process must be improbable. Hanson's list, while incomplete, describes the
following nine steps in an "evolutionary path" that results in the
colonization of the observable universe:

 1. The right [star system](/wiki/Star\_system "Star system") (including [organics](/wiki/Organic\_chemistry "Organic chemistry") and [potentially habitable](/wiki/Drake\_equation#Average\_number\_of\_planets\_that\_might\_support\_life\_per\_star\_that\_has\_planets,\_ne "Drake equation") [planets](/wiki/Planet "Planet"))
 2. Reproductive [molecules](/wiki/Molecules "Molecules") (e.g. [RNA](/wiki/RNA "RNA"))
 3. Simple ([prokaryotic](/wiki/Prokaryotic "Prokaryotic")) [single-cell life](/wiki/Microorganisms "Microorganisms")
 4. Complex ([eukaryotic](/wiki/Eukaryotic "Eukaryotic")) single-cell life
 5. [Sexual reproduction](/wiki/Sexual\_reproduction "Sexual reproduction")
 6. [Multi-cell life](/wiki/Evolution\_of\_multicellularity "Evolution of multicellularity")
 7. Tool-using [animals](/wiki/Animal "Animal") with [intelligence](/wiki/Intelligence "Intelligence")
 8. A civilization advancing toward the potential for a colonization explosion (where we are now)
 9. [Colonization explosion](/wiki/Space\_colonization#Beyond\_the\_Solar\_System "Space colonization")

According to the Great Filter hypothesis, at least one of these steps—if the
list were complete—must be improbable. If it is not an early step (i.e., in
the past), then the implication is that the improbable step lies in the future
and humanity's prospects of reaching step 9 (interstellar colonization) are
still bleak. If the past steps are likely, then many civilizations would have
developed to the current level of the human species. However, none [appear to
have](/wiki/Fermi\_paradox#Alien\_life\_is\_already\_here,\_unacknowledged "Fermi
paradox") made it to step 9, or the [Milky Way](/wiki/Milky\_Way "Milky Way")
would be full of colonies. So perhaps step 9 is the unlikely one, and the only
things that appear likely to keep us from step 9 are [some sort of
catastrophe](/wiki/Global\_catastrophic\_risk "Global catastrophic risk"), an
underestimation of the impact of procrastination as technology increasingly
unburdens existence, or resource exhaustion leading to the impossibility of
making the step due to consumption of the available resources (for example
highly constrained energy resources).[6] So by this argument, finding
[multicellular](/wiki/Multicellular "Multicellular") life on Mars (provided it
evolved independently) would be bad news, since it would imply steps 2–6 are
easy, and hence only 1, 7, 8 or 9 (or some unknown step) could be the big
problem.[4]

Although steps 1–8 have occurred on Earth, any one of these may be unlikely.
If the first seven steps are necessary preconditions to calculating the
likelihood (using the [local environment](/wiki/Realization\_\(probability\)
"Realization \(probability\)")) then an [anthropically
biased](/wiki/Anthropic\_bias "Anthropic bias") observer can
[infer](/wiki/Statistical\_hypothesis\_testing "Statistical hypothesis testing")
nothing about the general probabilities from its ([pre-
determined](/wiki/Prior\_probability "Prior probability")) surroundings.

In a 2020 paper, Jacob Haqq-Misra, Ravi Kumar Kopparapu, and Edward
Schwieterman argued that current and future telescopes searching for
[biosignatures](/wiki/Biosignatures "Biosignatures") in the ultraviolet to
near-infrared wavelengths could place upper bounds on the fraction of planets
in the galaxy that host life. Meanwhile, the evolution of telescopes that can
detect [technosignatures](/wiki/Technosignature "Technosignature") at mid-
infrared wavelengths could provide insights into the Great Filter. They say
that if planets with technosignatures are abundant, then this can increase
confidence that the Great Filter is in the past. On the other hand, if finding
that life is commonplace while technosignatures are absent, then this would
increase the likelihood that the Great Filter lies in the future.[7]

In a specific formulation named the "[Berserker
hypothesis](/wiki/Berserker\_hypothesis "Berserker hypothesis")", a filter
exists between steps 8 and 9 in which each civilization is destroyed by a
lethal [Von Neumann probe](/wiki/Von\_Neumann\_probes "Von Neumann probes")
created by a more advanced civilization.[8]
