Immense tree in Norse cosmology

For other uses, see [Yggdrasil
(disambiguation)](/wiki/Yggdrasil\_\(disambiguation\) "Yggdrasil
\(disambiguation\)").

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/8d/The\_Ash\_Yggdrasil\_by\_Friedrich\_Wilhelm\_Heine.jpg/220px-
The\_Ash\_Yggdrasil\_by\_Friedrich\_Wilhelm\_Heine.jpg)](/wiki/File:The\_Ash\_Yggdrasil\_by\_Friedrich\_Wilhelm\_Heine.jpg)"The
Ash Yggdrasil" (1886) by [Friedrich Wilhelm
Heine](/wiki/Friedrich\_Wilhelm\_Heine "Friedrich Wilhelm Heine")

\*\*Yggdrasil\*\* (from [Old Norse](/wiki/Old\_Norse\_language "Old Norse language")
\_Yggdrasill\_) is an immense and central [sacred tree](/wiki/World\_tree "World
tree") in [Norse cosmology](/wiki/Norse\_cosmology "Norse cosmology"). Around
it exists all else, including the [Nine Worlds](/wiki/Nine\_Worlds "Nine
Worlds").

Yggdrasil is attested in the \_[Poetic Edda](/wiki/Poetic\_Edda "Poetic Edda")\_
compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources, and in the
\_[Prose Edda](/wiki/Prose\_Edda "Prose Edda")\_ compiled in the 13th century by
[Snorri Sturluson](/wiki/Snorri\_Sturluson "Snorri Sturluson"). In both
sources, Yggdrasil is an immense [ash tree](/wiki/Fraxinus\_excelsior "Fraxinus
excelsior") that is central to the cosmos and considered very holy. The
[gods](/wiki/%C3%86sir "Æsir") go to Yggdrasil daily to assemble at their
[traditional governing assemblies](/wiki/Thing\_\(assembly\) "Thing
\(assembly\)"). The branches of Yggdrasil extend far into the heavens, and the
tree is supported by three roots that extend far away into other locations;
one to the well [Urðarbrunnr](/wiki/Ur%C3%B0arbrunnr "Urðarbrunnr") in the
heavens, one to the spring [Hvergelmir](/wiki/Hvergelmir "Hvergelmir"), and
another to the well [Mímisbrunnr](/wiki/M%C3%ADmisbrunnr "Mímisbrunnr").
Creatures live within Yggdrasil, including the dragon
[Níðhöggr](/wiki/N%C3%AD%C3%B0h%C3%B6ggr "Níðhöggr"), an [unnamed
eagle](/wiki/Ve%C3%B0rf%C3%B6lnir\_and\_eagle "Veðrfölnir and eagle"), and the
stags [Dáinn, Dvalinn, Duneyrr and
Duraþrór](/wiki/D%C3%A1inn,\_Dvalinn,\_Duneyrr\_and\_Dura%C3%BEr%C3%B3r "Dáinn,
Dvalinn, Duneyrr and Duraþrór").

Scholars generally consider \_[Hoddmímis holt](/wiki/Hoddm%C3%ADmis\_holt
"Hoddmímis holt")\_ , \_[Mímameiðr](/wiki/M%C3%ADmamei%C3%B0r "Mímameiðr")\_ ,
and \_[Læraðr](/wiki/L%C3%A6ra%C3%B0r "Læraðr")\_ to be other names for the
tree. The tree is an example of [sacred trees and groves in Germanic paganism
and
mythology](/wiki/Sacred\_trees\_and\_groves\_in\_Germanic\_paganism\_and\_mythology
"Sacred trees and groves in Germanic paganism and mythology"), and scholars in
the field of [Germanic philology](/wiki/Germanic\_philology "Germanic
philology") have long discussed its implications.
