###
Cosmology[[edit](/w/index.php?title=History\_of\_physics&action=edit&section=33
"Edit section: Cosmology")]

Main article: [Physical cosmology](/wiki/Physical\_cosmology "Physical
cosmology")

Cosmology may be said to have become a serious research question with the
publication of Einstein's General Theory of Relativity in 1915 although it did
not enter the scientific mainstream until the period known as the "[Golden age
of general relativity](/wiki/Golden\_age\_of\_general\_relativity "Golden age of
general relativity")".

About a decade later, in the midst of what was dubbed the "[Great
Debate](/wiki/Great\_Debate\_\(astronomy\) "Great Debate \(astronomy\)")",
[Hubble](/wiki/Edwin\_Hubble "Edwin Hubble") and [Slipher](/wiki/Vesto\_Slipher
"Vesto Slipher") discovered the [expansion of
universe](/wiki/Expansion\_of\_universe "Expansion of universe") in the 1920s
measuring the redshifts of [Doppler spectra](/wiki/Doppler\_spectra "Doppler
spectra") from galactic nebulae. Using Einstein's general relativity,
[Lemaître](/wiki/Georges\_Lema%C3%AEtre "Georges Lemaître") and
[Gamow](/wiki/George\_Gamow "George Gamow") formulated what would become known
as the [big bang theory](/wiki/Big\_bang\_theory "Big bang theory"). A rival,
called the [steady state theory](/wiki/Steady\_state\_theory "Steady state
theory"), was devised by [Hoyle](/wiki/Fred\_Hoyle "Fred Hoyle"),
[Gold](/wiki/Thomas\_Gold "Thomas Gold"), [Narlikar](/wiki/Jayant\_Narlikar
"Jayant Narlikar") and [Bondi](/wiki/Hermann\_Bondi "Hermann Bondi").

[Cosmic microwave background
radiation](/wiki/Cosmic\_microwave\_background\_radiation "Cosmic microwave
background radiation") was verified in the 1960s by
[Penzias](/wiki/Arno\_Allan\_Penzias "Arno Allan Penzias") and
[Wilson](/wiki/Robert\_Woodrow\_Wilson "Robert Woodrow Wilson"), and this
discovery favoured the big bang at the expense of the steady state scenario.
Later work was by [Smoot](/wiki/George\_Smoot "George Smoot") et al. (1989),
among other contributors, using data from the [Cosmic Background
explorer](/wiki/Cosmic\_Background\_explorer "Cosmic Background explorer")
(CoBE) and the [Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy
Probe](/wiki/Wilkinson\_Microwave\_Anisotropy\_Probe "Wilkinson Microwave
Anisotropy Probe") (WMAP) satellites that refined these observations. The
1980s (the same decade of the COBE measurements) also saw the proposal of
[inflation theory](/wiki/Inflation\_\(cosmology\) "Inflation \(cosmology\)") by
[Alan Guth](/wiki/Alan\_Guth "Alan Guth").

Recently the problems of dark matter and dark energy have risen to the top of
the cosmology agenda.
