###
Mechanics[[edit](/w/index.php?title=History\_of\_physics&action=edit&section=15
"Edit section: Mechanics")]

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b3/ETH-BIB-
Bernoulli%2C\_Daniel\_%281700-1782%29-Portrait-
Portr\_10971.tif\_%28cropped%29.jpg/220px-ETH-BIB-
Bernoulli%2C\_Daniel\_%281700-1782%29-Portrait-
Portr\_10971.tif\_%28cropped%29.jpg)](/wiki/File:ETH-BIB-
Bernoulli,\_Daniel\_\(1700-1782\)-Portrait-
Portr\_10971.tif\_\(cropped\).jpg)[Daniel Bernoulli](/wiki/Daniel\_Bernoulli
"Daniel Bernoulli") 
(1700–1782)

In 1714, [Brook Taylor](/wiki/Brook\_Taylor "Brook Taylor") derived the
[fundamental frequency](/wiki/Fundamental\_frequency "Fundamental frequency")
of a stretched vibrating string in terms of its tension and mass per unit
length by solving a [differential equation](/wiki/Differential\_equation
"Differential equation"). The Swiss mathematician [Daniel
Bernoulli](/wiki/Daniel\_Bernoulli "Daniel Bernoulli") (1700–1782) made
important mathematical studies of the behavior of gases, anticipating the
kinetic theory of gases developed more than a century later, and has been
referred to as the first mathematical physicist.[49] In 1733, Daniel Bernoulli
derived the fundamental frequency and [harmonics](/wiki/Harmonic "Harmonic")
of a hanging chain by solving a differential equation. In 1734, Bernoulli
solved the differential equation for the vibrations of an elastic bar clamped
at one end. Bernoulli's treatment of [fluid dynamics](/wiki/Fluid\_dynamics
"Fluid dynamics") and his examination of [fluid](/wiki/Fluid "Fluid") flow was
introduced in his 1738 work \_[Hydrodynamica](/wiki/Hydrodynamica
"Hydrodynamica")\_.

Rational mechanics dealt primarily with the development of elaborate
mathematical treatments of observed motions, using Newtonian principles as a
basis, and emphasized improving the tractability of complex calculations and
developing of legitimate means of analytical approximation. A representative
contemporary textbook was published by [Johann Baptiste
Horvath](/wiki/Johann\_Baptiste\_Horvath "Johann Baptiste Horvath"). By the end
of the century analytical treatments were rigorous enough to verify the
stability of the Solar System solely on the basis of Newton's laws without
reference to divine intervention—even as deterministic treatments of systems
as simple as the [three body problem](/wiki/N-body\_problem "N-body problem")
in gravitation remained intractable.[50] In 1705, [Edmond
Halley](/wiki/Edmond\_Halley "Edmond Halley") predicted the periodicity of
[Halley's Comet](/wiki/Halley%27s\_Comet "Halley's Comet"), [William
Herschel](/wiki/William\_Herschel "William Herschel") discovered
[Uranus](/wiki/Uranus "Uranus") in 1781, and [Henry
Cavendish](/wiki/Henry\_Cavendish "Henry Cavendish") measured the
[gravitational constant](/wiki/Gravitational\_constant "Gravitational
constant") and determined the mass of the Earth in 1798. In 1783, [John
Michell](/wiki/John\_Michell "John Michell") suggested that some objects might
be so massive that not even light could escape from them.

In 1739, [Leonhard Euler](/wiki/Leonhard\_Euler "Leonhard Euler") solved the
ordinary differential equation for a forced harmonic oscillator and noticed
the resonance phenomenon. In 1742, [Colin Maclaurin](/wiki/Colin\_Maclaurin
"Colin Maclaurin") discovered his [uniformly rotating self-gravitating
spheroids](/wiki/Maclaurin\_spheroid "Maclaurin spheroid"). In 1742, Benjamin
Robins published his \_New Principles in Gunnery\_ , establishing the science of
aerodynamics. British work, carried on by mathematicians such as Taylor and
Maclaurin, fell behind Continental developments as the century progressed.
Meanwhile, work flourished at scientific academies on the Continent, led by
such mathematicians as Bernoulli and Euler, as well as [Joseph-Louis
Lagrange](/wiki/Joseph-Louis\_Lagrange "Joseph-Louis Lagrange"), [Pierre-Simon
Laplace](/wiki/Pierre-Simon\_Laplace "Pierre-Simon Laplace"), and [Adrien-Marie
Legendre](/wiki/Adrien-Marie\_Legendre "Adrien-Marie Legendre"). In 1743, [Jean
le Rond d'Alembert](/wiki/Jean\_le\_Rond\_d%27Alembert "Jean le Rond d'Alembert")
published his \_Traité de dynamique\_ , in which he introduced the concept of
generalized forces for accelerating systems and systems with constraints, and
applied the new idea of [virtual work](/wiki/Virtual\_work "Virtual work") to
solve dynamical problem, now known as [D'Alembert's
principle](/wiki/D%27Alembert%27s\_principle "D'Alembert's principle"), as a
rival to Newton's second law of motion. In 1747, [Pierre Louis
Maupertuis](/wiki/Pierre\_Louis\_Maupertuis "Pierre Louis Maupertuis") applied
minimum principles to mechanics. In 1759, Euler solved the partial
differential equation for the vibration of a rectangular drum. In 1764, Euler
examined the partial differential equation for the vibration of a circular
drum and found one of the Bessel function solutions. In 1776, [John
Smeaton](/wiki/John\_Smeaton "John Smeaton") published a paper on experiments
relating power, [work](/wiki/Work\_\(physics\) "Work \(physics\)"),
[momentum](/wiki/Momentum "Momentum") and [kinetic
energy](/wiki/Kinetic\_energy "Kinetic energy"), and supporting the
[conservation of energy](/wiki/Conservation\_of\_energy "Conservation of
energy"). In 1788, Lagrange presented his [equations of
motion](/wiki/Lagrangian\_mechanics "Lagrangian mechanics") in \_[Mécanique
analytique](/wiki/M%C3%A9canique\_analytique "Mécanique analytique")\_ , in
which the whole of mechanics was organized around the principle of virtual
work. In 1789, [Antoine Lavoisier](/wiki/Antoine\_Lavoisier "Antoine
Lavoisier") stated the law of [conservation of
mass](/wiki/Conservation\_of\_mass "Conservation of mass"). The rational
mechanics developed in the 18th century received expositions in both
Lagrange's \_Mécanique analytique\_ and Laplace's \_[Traité de mécanique
céleste](/wiki/Trait%C3%A9\_de\_m%C3%A9canique\_c%C3%A9leste "Traité de mécanique
céleste")\_ (1799–1825).
