## Politics[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Conspiracy\_theory&action=edit&section=31
"Edit section: Politics")]

![Globe
icon.](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/bd/Ambox\_globe\_content.svg/48px-
Ambox\_globe\_content.svg.png)| The examples and perspective in this article
\*\*may not represent a[worldwide
view](/wiki/Wikipedia:WikiProject\_Countering\_systemic\_bias
"Wikipedia:WikiProject Countering systemic bias") of the subject\*\*. You may
[improve this
article](https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Conspiracy\_theory&action=edit),
discuss the issue on the [talk page](/wiki/Talk:Conspiracy\_theory
"Talk:Conspiracy theory"), or [create a new
article](/wiki/Wikipedia:Article\_wizard "Wikipedia:Article wizard"), as
appropriate. \_( June 2021)\_\_([Learn how and when to remove this
message](/wiki/Help:Maintenance\_template\_removal "Help:Maintenance template
removal"))\_ 
---|--- 
[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/2b/911worldopinionpoll\_Sep2008.png/390px-911worldopinionpoll\_Sep2008.png)](/wiki/File:911worldopinionpoll\_Sep2008.png)A
[2008 poll](/wiki/Opinion\_polls\_about\_9/11\_conspiracy\_theories "Opinion polls
about 9/11 conspiracy theories") found that majorities in only 9 of 17
countries believed that [al-Qaeda](/wiki/Al-Qaeda "Al-Qaeda") carried out the
[9/11 attacks](/wiki/September\_11\_attacks "September 11 attacks").[156]

The philosopher [Karl Popper](/wiki/Karl\_Popper "Karl Popper") described the
central problem of conspiracy theories as a form of [fundamental attribution
error](/wiki/Fundamental\_attribution\_error "Fundamental attribution error"),
where every event is generally perceived as being intentional and planned,
greatly underestimating the effects of randomness and unintended
consequences.[94] In his book \_[The Open Society and Its
Enemies](/wiki/The\_Open\_Society\_and\_Its\_Enemies "The Open Society and Its
Enemies")\_ , he used the term "the conspiracy theory of society" to denote the
idea that social phenomena such as "war, unemployment, poverty, shortages ...
[are] the result of direct design by some powerful individuals and
groups".[157] Popper argued that [totalitarianism](/wiki/Totalitarianism
"Totalitarianism") was founded on conspiracy theories which drew on imaginary
plots which were driven by paranoid scenarios predicated on
[tribalism](/wiki/Tribalism "Tribalism"), [chauvinism](/wiki/Chauvinism
"Chauvinism"), or [racism](/wiki/Racism "Racism"). He also noted that
conspirators very rarely achieved their goal.[158]

Historically, real conspiracies have usually had little effect on history and
have had [unforeseen consequences](/wiki/Unforeseen\_consequence "Unforeseen
consequence") for the conspirators, in contrast to conspiracy theories which
often posit grand, sinister organizations, or world-changing events, the
evidence for which has been erased or obscured.[159][160] As described by
[Bruce Cumings](/wiki/Bruce\_Cumings "Bruce Cumings"), history is instead
"moved by the broad forces and large structures of human collectivities".[159]
