### Pronatalism
advocacy[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Simone\_and\_Malcolm\_Collins&action=edit&section=3
"Edit section: Pronatalism advocacy")]

The Collinses are prominent[14][12][2] figures within the pronatalist
movement, which advocates for higher birth rates as a means to address
demographic and economic challenges.[1][14] They are the founders of
Pronatalist.org, a non-profit initiative aimed at promoting and supporting
high birth rates.[2][15] In 2023, they were speakers at The Natal Conference
in Austin, Texas.[16][17][18]

The Collinses fear that low fertility rates, especially among people they view
as high-achieving, could lead to a decline in innovation and societal progress
as well as the extinction of cultures, economic breakdown, and the collapse of
civilization.[19][20] They are part of a network of tech elites,[2] including
figures like [Elon Musk](/wiki/Elon\_Musk "Elon Musk"),[14][2] who publicly
express concerns about demographic trends leading to [population
collapse](/wiki/Population\_collapse "Population collapse").[12][18] The
Collinses are vocal supporters of using advanced reproductive technologies,
including [in vitro fertilisation](/wiki/In\_vitro\_fertilisation "In vitro
fertilisation") and [genetic screening](/wiki/Genetic\_testing "Genetic
testing"), to promote higher birth rates among economically and intellectually
productive populations.[15][21] They have been featured in discussions about
their use of [preimplantation genetic testing](/wiki/Pre-
implantation\_genetic\_testing "Pre-implantation genetic testing") to select
embryos.[22][1][23]

Concerns have been raised about the potential societal impacts of their views,
with some suggesting that their approach could exacerbate social inequalities
and promote divisive ideologies.[2][24][25][26] The Collinses have also been
labelled as "hipster [eugenicists](/wiki/Eugenics "Eugenics")" due to their
advocacy for selecting embryos based on perceived desirable traits, such as
high IQ;[24][23] they are said to find the moniker rather amusing, but
strongly disavow any form of racism and "scoffed at the idea that they were
eugenicists".[24][2]
