### Medieval
Europe[[edit](/w/index.php?title=History\_of\_physics&action=edit&section=5
"Edit section: Medieval Europe")]

Further information: [Theory of impetus](/wiki/Theory\_of\_impetus "Theory of
impetus")

Awareness of ancient works re-entered the West through [translations from
Arabic to Latin](/wiki/Latin\_translations\_of\_the\_12th\_century "Latin
translations of the 12th century"). Their re-introduction, combined with
[Judeo-Islamic](/wiki/Islam\_and\_Judaism "Islam and Judaism") theological
commentaries, had a great influence on [Medieval
philosophers](/wiki/Medieval\_philosophy "Medieval philosophy") such as [Thomas
Aquinas](/wiki/Thomas\_Aquinas "Thomas Aquinas"). [Scholastic European
scholars](/wiki/Scholasticism "Scholasticism"), who sought to reconcile the
philosophy of the ancient classical philosophers with [Christian
theology](/wiki/Christian\_theology "Christian theology"), proclaimed Aristotle
the greatest thinker of the ancient world. In cases where they didn't directly
contradict the Bible, Aristotelian physics became the foundation for the
physical explanations of the European Churches. Quantification became a core
element of medieval physics.[25]

Based on Aristotelian physics, Scholastic physics described things as moving
according to their essential nature. Celestial objects were described as
moving in circles, because perfect circular motion was considered an innate
property of objects that existed in the uncorrupted realm of the [celestial
spheres](/wiki/Celestial\_spheres "Celestial spheres"). The [theory of
impetus](/wiki/Theory\_of\_impetus "Theory of impetus"), the ancestor to the
concepts of [inertia](/wiki/Inertia "Inertia") and [momentum](/wiki/Momentum
"Momentum"), was developed along similar lines by [medieval
philosophers](/wiki/Medieval\_philosophy "Medieval philosophy") such as [John
Philoponus](/wiki/John\_Philoponus "John Philoponus") and [Jean
Buridan](/wiki/Jean\_Buridan "Jean Buridan"). Motions below the lunar sphere
were seen as imperfect, and thus could not be expected to exhibit consistent
motion. More idealized motion in the "sublunary" realm could only be achieved
through [artifice](/wiki/Mechanics\_\(Aristotle\) "Mechanics \(Aristotle\)"),
and prior to the 17th century, many did not view artificial experiments as a
valid means of learning about the natural world. Physical explanations in the
sublunary realm revolved around tendencies. Stones contained the element
earth, and earthly objects tended to move in a straight line toward the centre
of the earth (and the universe in the Aristotelian geocentric view) unless
otherwise prevented from doing so.[26]
