### Relation to general
relativity[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Quantum\_mechanics&action=edit&section=17
"Edit section: Relation to general relativity")]

Even though the predictions of both quantum theory and general relativity have
been supported by rigorous and repeated [empirical
evidence](/wiki/Empirical\_evidence "Empirical evidence"), their abstract
formalisms contradict each other and they have proven extremely difficult to
incorporate into one consistent, cohesive model. Gravity is negligible in many
areas of particle physics, so that unification between general relativity and
quantum mechanics is not an urgent issue in those particular applications.
However, the lack of a correct theory of [quantum
gravity](/wiki/Quantum\_gravity "Quantum gravity") is an important issue in
[physical cosmology](/wiki/Physical\_cosmology "Physical cosmology") and the
search by physicists for an elegant "[Theory of
Everything](/wiki/Theory\_of\_everything "Theory of everything")" (TOE).
Consequently, resolving the inconsistencies between both theories has been a
major goal of 20th- and 21st-century physics. This TOE would combine not only
the models of subatomic physics but also derive the four fundamental forces of
nature from a single force or phenomenon.[47]

One proposal for doing so is [string theory](/wiki/String\_theory "String
theory"), which posits that the [point-like particles](/wiki/Point\_particle
"Point particle") of [particle physics](/wiki/Particle\_physics "Particle
physics") are replaced by [one-
dimensional](/wiki/Dimension\_\(mathematics\_and\_physics\) "Dimension
\(mathematics and physics\)") objects called
[strings](/wiki/String\_\(physics\) "String \(physics\)"). String theory
describes how these strings propagate through space and interact with each
other. On distance scales larger than the string scale, a string looks just
like an ordinary particle, with its [mass](/wiki/Mass "Mass"),
[charge](/wiki/Charge\_\(physics\) "Charge \(physics\)"), and other properties
determined by the [vibrational](/wiki/Vibration "Vibration") state of the
string. In string theory, one of the many vibrational states of the string
corresponds to the [graviton](/wiki/Graviton "Graviton"), a quantum mechanical
particle that carries gravitational force.[48][49]

Another popular theory is [loop quantum gravity](/wiki/Loop\_quantum\_gravity
"Loop quantum gravity") (LQG), which describes quantum properties of gravity
and is thus a theory of [quantum spacetime](/wiki/Quantum\_spacetime "Quantum
spacetime"). LQG is an attempt to merge and adapt standard quantum mechanics
and standard general relativity. This theory describes space as an extremely
fine fabric "woven" of finite loops called [spin networks](/wiki/Spin\_network
"Spin network"). The evolution of a spin network over time is called a [spin
foam](/wiki/Spin\_foam "Spin foam"). The characteristic length scale of a spin
foam is the [Planck length](/wiki/Planck\_length "Planck length"),
approximately 1.616×10−35 m, and so lengths shorter than the Planck length are
not physically meaningful in LQG.[50]
