### Philosophy[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Game\_theory&action=edit&section=36
"Edit section: Philosophy")]

| Stag | Hare 
---|---|--- 
Stag | 3, 3 | 0, 2 
Hare | 2, 0 | 2, 2 
\_Stag hunt\_ 
 
Game theory has been put to several uses in [philosophy](/wiki/Philosophy
"Philosophy"). Responding to two papers by [W.V.O.
Quine](/wiki/Willard\_Van\_Orman\_Quine "Willard Van Orman Quine") (1960, 1967),
Lewis (1969) used game theory to develop a philosophical account of
[convention](/wiki/Convention\_\(norm\) "Convention \(norm\)"). In so doing, he
provided the first analysis of [common
knowledge](/wiki/Common\_knowledge\_\(logic\) "Common knowledge \(logic\)") and
employed it in analyzing play in [coordination games](/wiki/Coordination\_game
"Coordination game"). In addition, he first suggested that one can understand
[meaning](/wiki/Meaning\_\(semiotics\) "Meaning \(semiotics\)") in terms of
[signaling games](/wiki/Signaling\_games "Signaling games"). This later
suggestion has been pursued by several philosophers since Lewis.[131][132]
Following Lewis (1969) game-theoretic account of conventions, Edna Ullmann-
Margalit (1977) and [Bicchieri](/wiki/Cristina\_Bicchieri "Cristina Bicchieri")
(2006) have developed theories of [social norms](/wiki/Social\_norms "Social
norms") that define them as Nash equilibria that result from transforming a
mixed-motive game into a coordination game.[133][134]

Game theory has also challenged philosophers to think in terms of interactive
[epistemology](/wiki/Epistemology "Epistemology"): what it means for a
collective to have common beliefs or knowledge, and what are the consequences
of this knowledge for the social outcomes resulting from the interactions of
agents. Philosophers who have worked in this area include Bicchieri (1989,
1993),[135][136] [Skyrms](/wiki/Brian\_Skyrms "Brian Skyrms") (1990),[137] and
[Stalnaker](/wiki/Robert\_Stalnaker "Robert Stalnaker") (1999).[138]

The synthesis of game theory with [ethics](/wiki/Ethics "Ethics") was
championed by [R. B. Braithwaite](/wiki/R.\_B.\_Braithwaite "R. B.
Braithwaite").[139] The hope was that rigorous mathematical analysis of game
theory might help formalize the more imprecise philosophical discussions.
However, this expectation was only materialized to a limited extent.[140]

In [ethics](/wiki/Ethics "Ethics"), some (most notably David Gauthier, Gregory
Kavka, and Jean Hampton)
[\_[who?](/wiki/Wikipedia:Manual\_of\_Style/Words\_to\_watch#Unsupported\_attributions
"Wikipedia:Manual of Style/Words to watch")\_] authors have attempted to pursue
[Thomas Hobbes](/wiki/Thomas\_Hobbes "Thomas Hobbes")' project of deriving
morality from self-interest. Since games like the [prisoner's
dilemma](/wiki/Prisoner%27s\_dilemma "Prisoner's dilemma") present an apparent
conflict between morality and self-interest, explaining why cooperation is
required by self-interest is an important component of this project. This
general strategy is a component of the general [social
contract](/wiki/Social\_contract "Social contract") view in [political
philosophy](/wiki/Political\_philosophy "Political philosophy") (for examples,
see Gauthier (1986) and Kavka (1986)).[d]

Other authors have attempted to use evolutionary game theory in order to
explain the emergence of human attitudes about morality and corresponding
animal behaviors. These authors look at several games including the prisoner's
dilemma, [stag hunt](/wiki/Stag\_hunt "Stag hunt"), and the [Nash bargaining
game](/wiki/Nash\_bargaining\_game "Nash bargaining game") as providing an
explanation for the emergence of attitudes about morality (see, e.g., Skyrms
(1996, 2004) and Sober and Wilson (1998)).
