Means of human learning

The \*\*theory-theory\*\* (or '\*\*theory theory\*\* ') is a scientific theory
relating to the human development of understanding about the outside world.[1]
This theory asserts that individuals hold a basic or 'na√Øve' theory of
psychology ("[folk psychology](/wiki/Folk\_psychology "Folk psychology")") to
infer the mental states of others,[1] such as their beliefs, desires or
emotions. This information is used to understand the intentions behind that
person's actions or predict future behavior. The term 'perspective taking' is
sometimes used to describe how one makes inferences about another person's
inner state using theoretical knowledge about the other's situation.[2]

This approach has become popular with psychologists as it gives a basis from
which to explore human social understanding.[3] Beginning in the mid-1980s,
several influential developmental psychologists began advocating the theory
theory: the view that humans learn through a process of theory revision
closely resembling the way scientists propose and revise theories.[4] Children
observe the world, and in doing so, gather data about the world's true
structure. As more data accumulates, children can revise their naive theories
accordingly. Children can also use these theories about the world's causal
structure to make predictions, and possibly even test them out.[5] This
concept is described as the 'Child Scientist' theory,[6] proposing that a
series of personal scientific revolutions are required for the development of
theories about the outside world, including the social world.

In recent years, proponents of [Bayesian learning](/wiki/Bayesian\_learning
"Bayesian learning") have begun describing the theory theory in a precise,
mathematical way.[7] [8] The concept of Bayesian learning is rooted in the
assumption that children and adults learn through a process of theory
revision; that is, they hold prior beliefs about the world but, when receiving
conflicting data, may revise these beliefs depending upon their
strength.[4][\_[need quotation to verify](/wiki/Wikipedia:Verifiability
"Wikipedia:Verifiability")\_]
