##
Psychology[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Conspiracy\_theory&action=edit&section=21
"Edit section: Psychology")]

The widespread belief in conspiracy theories has become a topic of interest
for sociologists, psychologists, and experts in folklore since at least the
1960s, when [a number of conspiracy
theories](/wiki/John\_F.\_Kennedy\_assassination\_conspiracy\_theories "John F.
Kennedy assassination conspiracy theories") arose regarding [the
assassination](/wiki/John\_F.\_Kennedy\_assassination "John F. Kennedy
assassination") of U.S. President [John F. Kennedy](/wiki/John\_F.\_Kennedy
"John F. Kennedy"). [Sociologist](/wiki/Sociologist "Sociologist") Türkay
Salim Nefes underlines the political nature of conspiracy theories. He
suggests that one of the most important characteristics of these accounts is
their attempt to unveil the "real but hidden" power relations in social
groups.[106][107] The term "conspiracism" was popularized by academic Frank P.
Mintz in the 1980s. According to Mintz, conspiracism denotes "belief in the
primacy of conspiracies in the unfolding of history":[108]: 4

> Conspiracism serves the needs of diverse political and social groups in
> America and elsewhere. It identifies elites, blames them for economic and
> social catastrophes, and assumes that things will be better once popular
> action can remove them from positions of power. As such, conspiracy theories
> do not typify a particular epoch or ideology.[108]: 199

Research suggests, on a psychological level, \*\*conspiracist ideation\*\* —belief
in conspiracy theories—can be harmful or pathological,[20][21] and is highly
correlated with [psychological projection](/wiki/Psychological\_projection
"Psychological projection"), as well as with [paranoia](/wiki/Paranoia
"Paranoia"), which is predicted by the degree of a person's
[Machiavellianism](/wiki/Machiavellianism\_\(psychology\) "Machiavellianism
\(psychology\)").[109] The propensity to believe in conspiracy theories is
strongly associated with the mental health disorder of
[schizotypy](/wiki/Schizotypy "Schizotypy").[110][111][112][113][114]
Conspiracy theories once limited to fringe audiences have become commonplace
in [mass media](/wiki/Mass\_media "Mass media"), emerging as a [cultural
phenomenon](/wiki/Cultural\_phenomenon "Cultural phenomenon") of the late 20th
and early 21st centuries.[43][44][45][46] Exposure to conspiracy theories in
news media and popular entertainment increases receptiveness to conspiratorial
ideas, and has also increased the social acceptability of fringe
beliefs.[27][115]

Conspiracy theories often make use of complicated and detailed arguments,
including ones which appear to be analytical or scientific. However, belief in
conspiracy theories is primarily driven by emotion.[47] One of the most widely
confirmed facts about conspiracy theories is that belief in a single
conspiracy theory tends to promote belief in other unrelated conspiracy
theories as well.[32][116] This even applies when the conspiracy theories
directly contradict each other, e.g. believing that [Osama bin
Laden](/wiki/Osama\_bin\_Laden "Osama bin Laden") was already dead before his
compound in Pakistan was attacked makes the same person more likely to believe
that he is still alive. One conclusion from this finding is that the content
of a conspiracist belief is less important than the idea of a coverup by the
authorities.[32][94][117] [Analytical thinking](/wiki/Analytical\_thinking
"Analytical thinking") aids in reducing belief in conspiracy theories, in part
because it emphasizes rational and critical cognition.[41]

Some psychological scientists assert that explanations related to conspiracy
theories can be, and often are "internally consistent" with strong beliefs
that had previously been held prior to the event that sparked the
conspiracy.[41] People who believe in conspiracy theories tend to believe in
other unsubstantiated claims – including [pseudoscience](/wiki/Pseudoscience
"Pseudoscience") and [paranormal](/wiki/Paranormal "Paranormal")
phenomena.[118]
