#### Astrophysics[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Physics&action=edit&section=24
"Edit section: Astrophysics")]

Main articles: [Astrophysics](/wiki/Astrophysics "Astrophysics") and [Physical
cosmology](/wiki/Physical\_cosmology "Physical cosmology")

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/0d/Hubble\_ultra\_deep\_field\_high\_rez\_edit1.jpg/330px-
Hubble\_ultra\_deep\_field\_high\_rez\_edit1.jpg)](/wiki/File:Hubble\_ultra\_deep\_field\_high\_rez\_edit1.jpg)The
deepest visible-light image of the [universe](/wiki/Universe "Universe"), the
[Hubble Ultra-Deep Field](/wiki/Hubble\_Ultra-Deep\_Field "Hubble Ultra-Deep
Field"). The vast majority of objects seen above are distant galaxies.

Astrophysics and astronomy are the application of the theories and methods of
physics to the study of [stellar structure](/wiki/Stellar\_structure "Stellar
structure"), [stellar evolution](/wiki/Stellar\_evolution "Stellar evolution"),
the origin of the Solar System, and related problems of cosmology. Because
astrophysics is a broad subject, astrophysicists typically apply many
disciplines of physics, including mechanics, electromagnetism, statistical
mechanics, thermodynamics, quantum mechanics, relativity, nuclear and particle
physics, and atomic and molecular physics.[89]

The discovery by [Karl Jansky](/wiki/Karl\_Jansky "Karl Jansky") in 1931 that
radio signals were emitted by celestial bodies initiated the science of [radio
astronomy](/wiki/Radio\_astronomy "Radio astronomy"). Most recently, the
frontiers of astronomy have been expanded by space exploration. Perturbations
and interference from the Earth's atmosphere make space-based observations
necessary for [infrared](/wiki/Infrared\_astronomy "Infrared astronomy"),
[ultraviolet](/wiki/Ultraviolet\_astronomy "Ultraviolet astronomy"), [gamma-
ray](/wiki/Gamma-ray\_astronomy "Gamma-ray astronomy"), and [X-ray
astronomy](/wiki/X-ray\_astronomy "X-ray astronomy").

Physical cosmology is the study of the formation and evolution of the universe
on its largest scales. Albert Einstein's theory of relativity plays a central
role in all modern cosmological theories. In the early 20th century,
[Hubble](/wiki/Edwin\_Hubble "Edwin Hubble")'s discovery that the universe is
expanding, as shown by the [Hubble diagram](/wiki/Hubble\_diagram "Hubble
diagram"), prompted rival explanations known as the [steady
state](/wiki/Steady-state\_model "Steady-state model") universe and the [Big
Bang](/wiki/Big\_Bang "Big Bang").

The Big Bang was confirmed by the success of [Big Bang
nucleosynthesis](/wiki/Big\_Bang\_nucleosynthesis "Big Bang nucleosynthesis")
and the discovery of the [cosmic microwave
background](/wiki/Cosmic\_microwave\_background "Cosmic microwave background")
in 1964. The Big Bang model rests on two theoretical pillars: Albert
Einstein's general relativity and the [cosmological
principle](/wiki/Cosmological\_principle "Cosmological principle").
Cosmologists have recently established the [ΛCDM model](/wiki/Lambda-CDM\_model
"Lambda-CDM model") of the evolution of the universe, which includes [cosmic
inflation](/wiki/Cosmic\_inflation "Cosmic inflation"), [dark
energy](/wiki/Dark\_energy "Dark energy"), and [dark matter](/wiki/Dark\_matter
"Dark matter").

Numerous possibilities and discoveries are anticipated to emerge from new data
from the [Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope](/wiki/Fermi\_Gamma-
ray\_Space\_Telescope "Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope") over the upcoming
decade and vastly revise or clarify existing models of the universe.[90][91]
In particular, the potential for a tremendous discovery surrounding dark
matter is possible over the next several years.[92] Fermi will search for
evidence that dark matter is composed of [weakly interacting massive
particles](/wiki/Weakly\_interacting\_massive\_particles "Weakly interacting
massive particles"), complementing similar experiments with the [Large Hadron
Collider](/wiki/Large\_Hadron\_Collider "Large Hadron Collider") and other
underground detectors.

[IBEX](/wiki/IBEX "IBEX") is already yielding new
[astrophysical](/wiki/Astrophysical "Astrophysical") discoveries: "No one
knows what is creating the [ENA (energetic neutral
atoms)](/wiki/Energetic\_neutral\_atom "Energetic neutral atom") ribbon" along
the [termination shock](/wiki/Termination\_shock "Termination shock") of the
[solar wind](/wiki/Solar\_wind "Solar wind"), "but everyone agrees that it
means the textbook picture of the [heliosphere](/wiki/Heliosphere
"Heliosphere")—in which the Solar System's enveloping pocket filled with the
solar wind's charged particles is plowing through the onrushing 'galactic
wind' of the interstellar medium in the shape of a comet—is wrong."[93]
