Description of physical properties at the atomic and subatomic scale

For a more accessible and less technical introduction to this topic, see
[Introduction to quantum mechanics](/wiki/Introduction\_to\_quantum\_mechanics
"Introduction to quantum mechanics").

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/e7/Hydrogen\_Density\_Plots.png/290px-
Hydrogen\_Density\_Plots.png)](/wiki/File:Hydrogen\_Density\_Plots.png)[Wave
functions](/wiki/Wave\_function "Wave function") of the
[electron](/wiki/Electron "Electron") in a hydrogen atom at different energy
levels. Quantum mechanics cannot predict the exact location of a particle in
space, only the probability of finding it at different locations.[1] The
brighter areas represent a higher probability of finding the electron. Part of
a series of articles about 
--- 
Quantum mechanics 
i ℏ d d t | Ψ ⟩ = H ^ | Ψ ⟩ {\displaystyle i\hbar {\frac {d}{dt}}|\Psi \rangle ={\hat {H}}|\Psi \rangle } ![{\\displaystyle i\\hbar {\\frac {d}{dt}}|\\Psi \\rangle ={\\hat {H}}|\\Psi \\rangle }](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest\_v1/media/math/render/svg/1799e4a910c7d26396922a20ef5ceec25ca1871c)[Schrödinger equation](/wiki/Schr%C3%B6dinger\_equation "Schrödinger equation") 
 
 \* [Introduction](/wiki/Introduction\_to\_quantum\_mechanics "Introduction to quantum mechanics")
 \* [Glossary](/wiki/Glossary\_of\_elementary\_quantum\_mechanics "Glossary of elementary quantum mechanics")
 \* [History](/wiki/History\_of\_quantum\_mechanics "History of quantum mechanics")

 
Background

 \* [Classical mechanics](/wiki/Classical\_mechanics "Classical mechanics")
 \* [Old quantum theory](/wiki/Old\_quantum\_theory "Old quantum theory")
 \* [Bra–ket notation](/wiki/Bra%E2%80%93ket\_notation "Bra–ket notation")

 \* [Hamiltonian](/wiki/Hamiltonian\_\(quantum\_mechanics\) "Hamiltonian \(quantum mechanics\)")
 \* [Interference](/wiki/Wave\_interference "Wave interference")

 
Fundamentals

 \* [Complementarity](/wiki/Complementarity\_\(physics\) "Complementarity \(physics\)")
 \* [Decoherence](/wiki/Quantum\_decoherence "Quantum decoherence")
 \* [Entanglement](/wiki/Quantum\_entanglement "Quantum entanglement")
 \* [Energy level](/wiki/Energy\_level "Energy level")
 \* [Measurement](/wiki/Measurement\_in\_quantum\_mechanics "Measurement in quantum mechanics")
 \* [Nonlocality](/wiki/Quantum\_nonlocality "Quantum nonlocality")
 \* [Quantum number](/wiki/Quantum\_number "Quantum number")
 \* [State](/wiki/Quantum\_state "Quantum state")
 \* [Superposition](/wiki/Quantum\_superposition "Quantum superposition")
 \* [Symmetry](/wiki/Symmetry\_in\_quantum\_mechanics "Symmetry in quantum mechanics")
 \* [Tunnelling](/wiki/Quantum\_tunnelling "Quantum tunnelling")
 \* [Uncertainty](/wiki/Uncertainty\_principle "Uncertainty principle")
 \* [Wave function](/wiki/Wave\_function "Wave function")
 \* [Collapse](/wiki/Wave\_function\_collapse "Wave function collapse")

 
Experiments

 \* [Bell's inequality](/wiki/Bell\_test "Bell test")
 \* [Davisson-Germer](/wiki/Davisson%E2%80%93Germer\_experiment "Davisson–Germer experiment")
 \* [Double-slit](/wiki/Double-slit\_experiment "Double-slit experiment")
 \* [Elitzur-Vaidman](/wiki/Elitzur%E2%80%93Vaidman\_bomb\_tester "Elitzur–Vaidman bomb tester")
 \* [Franck-Hertz](/wiki/Franck%E2%80%93Hertz\_experiment "Franck–Hertz experiment")
 \* [Leggett–Garg inequality](/wiki/Leggett%E2%80%93Garg\_inequality "Leggett–Garg inequality")
 \* [Mach-Zehnder](/wiki/Mach%E2%80%93Zehnder\_interferometer "Mach–Zehnder interferometer")
 \* [Popper](/wiki/Popper%27s\_experiment "Popper's experiment")

 \* [Quantum eraser](/wiki/Quantum\_eraser\_experiment "Quantum eraser experiment")
 \* [Delayed-choice](/wiki/Delayed-choice\_quantum\_eraser "Delayed-choice quantum eraser")

 \* [Schrödinger's cat](/wiki/Schr%C3%B6dinger%27s\_cat "Schrödinger's cat")
 \* [Stern-Gerlach](/wiki/Stern%E2%80%93Gerlach\_experiment "Stern–Gerlach experiment")
 \* [Wheeler's delayed-choice](/wiki/Wheeler%27s\_delayed-choice\_experiment "Wheeler's delayed-choice experiment")

 
Formulations

 \* [Overview](/wiki/Mathematical\_formulation\_of\_quantum\_mechanics "Mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics")

 \* [Heisenberg](/wiki/Heisenberg\_picture "Heisenberg picture")
 \* [Interaction](/wiki/Interaction\_picture "Interaction picture")
 \* [Matrix](/wiki/Matrix\_mechanics "Matrix mechanics")
 \* [Phase-space](/wiki/Phase-space\_formulation "Phase-space formulation")
 \* [Schrödinger](/wiki/Schr%C3%B6dinger\_picture "Schrödinger picture")
 \* [Sum-over-histories (path integral)](/wiki/Path\_integral\_formulation "Path integral formulation")

 
Equations

 \* [Dirac](/wiki/Dirac\_equation "Dirac equation")
 \* [Klein–Gordon](/wiki/Klein%E2%80%93Gordon\_equation "Klein–Gordon equation")
 \* [Pauli](/wiki/Pauli\_equation "Pauli equation")
 \* [Rydberg](/wiki/Rydberg\_formula "Rydberg formula")
 \* [Schrödinger](/wiki/Schr%C3%B6dinger\_equation "Schrödinger equation")

 
[Interpretations](/wiki/Interpretations\_of\_quantum\_mechanics "Interpretations
of quantum mechanics")

 \* [Bayesian](/wiki/Quantum\_Bayesianism "Quantum Bayesianism")
 \* [Consistent histories](/wiki/Consistent\_histories "Consistent histories")
 \* [Copenhagen](/wiki/Copenhagen\_interpretation "Copenhagen interpretation")
 \* [de Broglie–Bohm](/wiki/De\_Broglie%E2%80%93Bohm\_theory "De Broglie–Bohm theory")
 \* [Ensemble](/wiki/Ensemble\_interpretation "Ensemble interpretation")
 \* [Hidden-variable](/wiki/Hidden-variable\_theory "Hidden-variable theory")
 \* [Local](/wiki/Local\_hidden-variable\_theory "Local hidden-variable theory")
 \* [Superdeterminism](/wiki/Superdeterminism "Superdeterminism")
 \* [Many-worlds](/wiki/Many-worlds\_interpretation "Many-worlds interpretation")
 \* [Objective-collapse](/wiki/Objective-collapse\_theory "Objective-collapse theory")
 \* [Quantum logic](/wiki/Quantum\_logic "Quantum logic")
 \* [Relational](/wiki/Relational\_quantum\_mechanics "Relational quantum mechanics")
 \* [Transactional](/wiki/Transactional\_interpretation "Transactional interpretation")
 \* [Von Neumann–Wigner](/wiki/Von\_Neumann%E2%80%93Wigner\_interpretation "Von Neumann–Wigner interpretation")

 
Advanced topics

 \* [Relativistic quantum mechanics](/wiki/Relativistic\_quantum\_mechanics "Relativistic quantum mechanics")
 \* [Quantum field theory](/wiki/Quantum\_field\_theory "Quantum field theory")
 \* [Quantum information science](/wiki/Quantum\_information\_science "Quantum information science")
 \* [Quantum computing](/wiki/Quantum\_computing "Quantum computing")
 \* [Quantum chaos](/wiki/Quantum\_chaos "Quantum chaos")
 \* [EPR paradox](/wiki/Einstein%E2%80%93Podolsky%E2%80%93Rosen\_paradox "Einstein–Podolsky–Rosen paradox")
 \* [Density matrix](/wiki/Density\_matrix "Density matrix")
 \* [Scattering theory](/wiki/Scattering\_theory "Scattering theory")
 \* [Quantum statistical mechanics](/wiki/Quantum\_statistical\_mechanics "Quantum statistical mechanics")
 \* [Quantum machine learning](/wiki/Quantum\_machine\_learning "Quantum machine learning")

 
Scientists

 \* [Aharonov](/wiki/Yakir\_Aharonov "Yakir Aharonov")
 \* [Bell](/wiki/John\_Stewart\_Bell "John Stewart Bell")
 \* [Bethe](/wiki/Hans\_Bethe "Hans Bethe")
 \* [Blackett](/wiki/Patrick\_Blackett "Patrick Blackett")
 \* [Bloch](/wiki/Felix\_Bloch "Felix Bloch")
 \* [Bohm](/wiki/David\_Bohm "David Bohm")
 \* [Bohr](/wiki/Niels\_Bohr "Niels Bohr")
 \* [Born](/wiki/Max\_Born "Max Born")
 \* [Bose](/wiki/Satyendra\_Nath\_Bose "Satyendra Nath Bose")
 \* [de Broglie](/wiki/Louis\_de\_Broglie "Louis de Broglie")
 \* [Compton](/wiki/Arthur\_Compton "Arthur Compton")
 \* [Dirac](/wiki/Paul\_Dirac "Paul Dirac")
 \* [Davisson](/wiki/Clinton\_Davisson "Clinton Davisson")
 \* [Debye](/wiki/Peter\_Debye "Peter Debye")
 \* [Ehrenfest](/wiki/Paul\_Ehrenfest "Paul Ehrenfest")
 \* [Einstein](/wiki/Albert\_Einstein "Albert Einstein")
 \* [Everett](/wiki/Hugh\_Everett\_III "Hugh Everett III")
 \* [Fock](/wiki/Vladimir\_Fock "Vladimir Fock")
 \* [Fermi](/wiki/Enrico\_Fermi "Enrico Fermi")
 \* [Feynman](/wiki/Richard\_Feynman "Richard Feynman")
 \* [Glauber](/wiki/Roy\_J.\_Glauber "Roy J. Glauber")
 \* [Gutzwiller](/wiki/Martin\_Gutzwiller "Martin Gutzwiller")
 \* [Heisenberg](/wiki/Werner\_Heisenberg "Werner Heisenberg")
 \* [Hilbert](/wiki/David\_Hilbert "David Hilbert")
 \* [Jordan](/wiki/Pascual\_Jordan "Pascual Jordan")
 \* [Kramers](/wiki/Hans\_Kramers "Hans Kramers")
 \* [Lamb](/wiki/Willis\_Lamb "Willis Lamb")
 \* [Landau](/wiki/Lev\_Landau "Lev Landau")
 \* [Laue](/wiki/Max\_von\_Laue "Max von Laue")
 \* [Moseley](/wiki/Henry\_Moseley "Henry Moseley")
 \* [Millikan](/wiki/Robert\_Andrews\_Millikan "Robert Andrews Millikan")
 \* [Onnes](/wiki/Heike\_Kamerlingh\_Onnes "Heike Kamerlingh Onnes")
 \* [Pauli](/wiki/Wolfgang\_Pauli "Wolfgang Pauli")
 \* [Planck](/wiki/Max\_Planck "Max Planck")
 \* [Rabi](/wiki/Isidor\_Isaac\_Rabi "Isidor Isaac Rabi")
 \* [Raman](/wiki/C.\_V.\_Raman "C. V. Raman")
 \* [Rydberg](/wiki/Johannes\_Rydberg "Johannes Rydberg")
 \* [Schrödinger](/wiki/Erwin\_Schr%C3%B6dinger "Erwin Schrödinger")
 \* [Simmons](/wiki/Michelle\_Simmons "Michelle Simmons")
 \* [Sommerfeld](/wiki/Arnold\_Sommerfeld "Arnold Sommerfeld")
 \* [von Neumann](/wiki/John\_von\_Neumann "John von Neumann")
 \* [Weyl](/wiki/Hermann\_Weyl "Hermann Weyl")
 \* [Wien](/wiki/Wilhelm\_Wien "Wilhelm Wien")
 \* [Wigner](/wiki/Eugene\_Wigner "Eugene Wigner")
 \* [Zeeman](/wiki/Pieter\_Zeeman "Pieter Zeeman")
 \* [Zeilinger](/wiki/Anton\_Zeilinger "Anton Zeilinger")

 
 
 \* [v](/wiki/Template:Quantum\_mechanics "Template:Quantum mechanics")
 \* [t](/wiki/Template\_talk:Quantum\_mechanics "Template talk:Quantum mechanics")
 \* [e](/wiki/Special:EditPage/Template:Quantum\_mechanics "Special:EditPage/Template:Quantum mechanics")

 
 
\*\*Quantum mechanics\*\* is a fundamental [theory](/wiki/Scientific\_theory
"Scientific theory") in [physics](/wiki/Physics "Physics") that describes the
behavior of [nature](/wiki/Nature "Nature") at and below the scale of
[atoms](/wiki/Atom "Atom").[2]: 1.1 It is the foundation of all \*\*quantum
physics\*\* , which includes [quantum chemistry](/wiki/Quantum\_chemistry
"Quantum chemistry"), [quantum field theory](/wiki/Quantum\_field\_theory
"Quantum field theory"), [quantum technology](/wiki/Quantum\_technology
"Quantum technology"), and [quantum information
science](/wiki/Quantum\_information\_science "Quantum information science").

Quantum mechanics can describe many systems that [classical
physics](/wiki/Classical\_physics "Classical physics") cannot. Classical
physics can describe many aspects of nature at an ordinary
([macroscopic](/wiki/Macroscopic\_scale "Macroscopic scale") and [(optical)
microscopic](/wiki/Microscopic\_scale "Microscopic scale")) scale, but is not
sufficient for describing them at very small
[submicroscopic](/wiki/Submicroscopic "Submicroscopic") (atomic and
[subatomic](/wiki/Subatomic\_particle "Subatomic particle")) scales. Most
theories in classical physics can be derived from quantum mechanics as an
approximation valid at large (macroscopic/microscopic) scale.[3]

Quantum systems have [bound](/wiki/Bound\_state "Bound state") states that are
[quantized](/wiki/Quantization\_\(physics\) "Quantization \(physics\)") to
[discrete values](/wiki/Discrete\_mathematics "Discrete mathematics") of
[energy](/wiki/Energy "Energy"), [momentum](/wiki/Momentum "Momentum"),
[angular momentum](/wiki/Angular\_momentum "Angular momentum"), and other
quantities, in contrast to classical systems where these quantities can be
measured continuously. Measurements of quantum systems show characteristics of
both [particles](/wiki/Particle "Particle") and [waves](/wiki/Wave "Wave")
([wave–particle duality](/wiki/Wave%E2%80%93particle\_duality "Wave–particle
duality")), and there are limits to how accurately the value of a physical
quantity can be predicted prior to its measurement, given a complete set of
initial conditions (the [uncertainty principle](/wiki/Uncertainty\_principle
"Uncertainty principle")).

Quantum mechanics [arose gradually](/wiki/History\_of\_quantum\_mechanics
"History of quantum mechanics") from theories to explain observations that
could not be reconciled with classical physics, such as [Max
Planck](/wiki/Max\_Planck "Max Planck")'s solution in 1900 to the [black-body
radiation](/wiki/Black-body\_radiation "Black-body radiation") problem, and the
correspondence between energy and frequency in [Albert
Einstein](/wiki/Albert\_Einstein "Albert Einstein")'s [1905
paper](/wiki/Annus\_Mirabilis\_papers#Photoelectric\_effect "Annus Mirabilis
papers"), which explained the [photoelectric
effect](/wiki/Photoelectric\_effect "Photoelectric effect"). These early
attempts to understand microscopic phenomena, now known as the "[old quantum
theory](/wiki/Old\_quantum\_theory "Old quantum theory")", led to the full
development of quantum mechanics in the mid-1920s by [Niels
Bohr](/wiki/Niels\_Bohr "Niels Bohr"), [Erwin
Schrödinger](/wiki/Erwin\_Schr%C3%B6dinger "Erwin Schrödinger"), [Werner
Heisenberg](/wiki/Werner\_Heisenberg "Werner Heisenberg"), [Max
Born](/wiki/Max\_Born "Max Born"), [Paul Dirac](/wiki/Paul\_Dirac "Paul Dirac")
and others. The modern theory is formulated in various [specially developed
mathematical formalisms](/wiki/Mathematical\_formulations\_of\_quantum\_mechanics
"Mathematical formulations of quantum mechanics"). In one of them, a
mathematical entity called the [wave function](/wiki/Wave\_function "Wave
function") provides information, in the form of [probability
amplitudes](/wiki/Probability\_amplitude "Probability amplitude"), about what
measurements of a particle's energy, momentum, and other physical properties
may yield.
