Theories of human motivation

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b5/McgregorXY-
languages\_%28cropped%29.svg/220px-McgregorXY-
languages\_%28cropped%29.svg.png)](/wiki/File:McgregorXY-
languages\_\(cropped\).svg)[Mnemonic](/wiki/Mnemonic "Mnemonic") device for the
two theories: a person refusing to work ("X") and a person cheering the
opportunity to work ("Y")

\*\*Theory X and Theory Y\*\* are theories of human [work
motivation](/wiki/Work\_motivation "Work motivation") and management. They were
created by [Douglas McGregor](/wiki/Douglas\_McGregor "Douglas McGregor") while
he was working at the [MIT Sloan School of
Management](/wiki/MIT\_Sloan\_School\_of\_Management "MIT Sloan School of
Management") in the 1950s, and developed further in the 1960s.[1] McGregor's
work was rooted in motivation theory alongside the works of [Abraham
Maslow](/wiki/Abraham\_Maslow "Abraham Maslow"), who created the [hierarchy of
needs](/wiki/Hierarchy\_of\_needs "Hierarchy of needs"). The two theories
proposed by McGregor describe contrasting models of workforce
[motivation](/wiki/Motivation "Motivation") applied by managers in [human
resource management](/wiki/Human\_resource\_management "Human resource
management"), [organizational behavior](/wiki/Organizational\_behavior
"Organizational behavior"), [organizational
communication](/wiki/Organizational\_communication "Organizational
communication") and [organizational
development](/wiki/Organizational\_development "Organizational development").
Theory X explains the importance of heightened supervision, external rewards,
and penalties, while Theory Y highlights the motivating role of [job
satisfaction](/wiki/Job\_satisfaction "Job satisfaction") and encourages
workers to approach tasks without direct [supervision](/wiki/Supervision
"Supervision"). Management use of Theory X and Theory Y can affect employee
motivation and productivity in different ways, and managers may choose to
implement strategies from both theories into their practices.[2]
