## Theory–practice
relationship[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Theory&action=edit&section=6 "Edit
section: Theory–practice relationship")]

See also: [Praxis (process)](/wiki/Praxis\_\(process\) "Praxis \(process\)")

Theory is often distinguished from practice or praxis. The question of whether
theoretical models of work are relevant to work itself is of interest to
scholars of professions such as medicine, engineering, law, and
management.[13]: 802

The gap between theory and practice has been framed as a [knowledge
transfer](/wiki/Knowledge\_transfer "Knowledge transfer") where there is a task
of translating research knowledge to be application in practice, and ensuring
that practitioners are made aware of it. Academics have been criticized for
not attempting to transfer the knowledge they produce to practitioners.[13]:
804 [14] Another framing supposes that theory and knowledge seek to understand
different problems and model the world in different words (using different
[ontologies](/wiki/Ontology "Ontology") and
[epistemologies](/wiki/Epistemology "Epistemology")). Another framing says
that research does not produce theory that is relevant to practice.[13]: 803

In the context of management, Van de Van and Johnson propose a form of
[engaged scholarship](/wiki/Engaged\_scholarship "Engaged scholarship") where
scholars examine problems that occur in practice, in an
[interdisciplinary](/wiki/Interdisciplinarity "Interdisciplinarity") fashion,
producing results that create both new practical results as well as new
theoretical models, but targeting theoretical results shared in an academic
fashion.[13]: 815 They use a metaphor of "arbitrage" of ideas between
disciplines, distinguishing it from collaboration.[13]: 803
