### Christiaan
Huygens[[edit](/w/index.php?title=History\_of\_physics&action=edit&section=10
"Edit section: Christiaan Huygens")]

Main article: [Christiaan Huygens](/wiki/Christiaan\_Huygens "Christiaan
Huygens")

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/a4/Christiaan\_Huygens-
painting.jpeg/170px-Christiaan\_Huygens-
painting.jpeg)](/wiki/File:Christiaan\_Huygens-painting.jpeg)Christiaan Huygens 
(1629–1695)

The Dutch physicist, mathematician, astronomer and inventor Christiaan Huygens
(1629–1695) was the leading scientist in Europe between Galileo and Newton.
Huygens came from a family of nobility that had an important position in the
Dutch society of the 17th century; a time in which the [Dutch
Republic](/wiki/Dutch\_Republic "Dutch Republic") flourished economically and
culturally. This period — roughly between 1588 and 1702 — of the [history of
the Netherlands](/wiki/History\_of\_the\_Netherlands "History of the
Netherlands") is also referred to as the [Dutch Golden
Age](/wiki/Dutch\_Golden\_Age "Dutch Golden Age"), an era during the Scientific
Revolution when Dutch science was among the most acclaimed in Europe. At this
time, intellectuals and scientists like René Descartes, [Baruch
Spinoza](/wiki/Baruch\_Spinoza "Baruch Spinoza"), [Pierre
Bayle](/wiki/Pierre\_Bayle "Pierre Bayle"), [Antonie van
Leeuwenhoek](/wiki/Antonie\_van\_Leeuwenhoek "Antonie van Leeuwenhoek"), [John
Locke](/wiki/John\_Locke "John Locke") and [Hugo Grotius](/wiki/Hugo\_Grotius
"Hugo Grotius") resided in the Netherlands. It was in this intellectual
environment where Christiaan Huygens grew up. Christiaan's father,
[Constantijn Huygens](/wiki/Constantijn\_Huygens "Constantijn Huygens"), was,
apart from an important poet, the secretary and diplomat for the Princes of
Orange. He knew many scientists of his time because of his contacts and
intellectual interests, including René Descartes and [Marin
Mersenne](/wiki/Marin\_Mersenne "Marin Mersenne"), and it was because of these
contacts that Christiaan Huygens became aware of their work. Especially
Descartes, whose mechanistic philosophy was going to have a huge influence on
Huygens' own work. Descartes was later impressed by the skills Christiaan
Huygens showed in geometry, as was Mersenne, who christened him "the new
Archimedes" (which led Constantijn to refer to his son as "my little
Archimedes").

A child prodigy, Huygens began his correspondence with Marin Mersenne when he
was 17 years old. Huygens became interested in [games of
chance](/wiki/Games\_of\_chance "Games of chance") when he encountered the work
of [Fermat](/wiki/Fermat "Fermat"), [Blaise Pascal](/wiki/Blaise\_Pascal
"Blaise Pascal") and [Girard Desargues](/wiki/Girard\_Desargues "Girard
Desargues"). It was Blaise Pascal who encourages him to write \_Van Rekeningh
in Spelen van Gluck\_ , which [Frans van Schooten](/wiki/Frans\_van\_Schooten
"Frans van Schooten") translated and published as \_De Ratiociniis in Ludo
Aleae\_ in 1657. The book is the earliest known scientific treatment of the
subject, and at the time the most coherent presentation of a mathematical
approach to games of chance. Two years later Huygens derived geometrically the
now standard formulae in classical mechanics for the
[centripetal-](/wiki/Centripetal\_force "Centripetal force") and [centrifugal
force](/wiki/Centrifugal\_force "Centrifugal force") in his work \_De vi
Centrifuga\_ (1659). Around the same time Huygens' research in
[horology](/wiki/Horology "Horology") resulted in the invention of the
[pendulum clock](/wiki/Pendulum\_clock "Pendulum clock"); a breakthrough in
timekeeping and the most accurate timekeeper for almost 300 years. The
theoretical research of the way the pendulum works eventually led to the
publication of one of his most important achievements: the [Horologium
Oscillatorium](/wiki/Horologium\_Oscillatorium "Horologium Oscillatorium").
This work was published in 1673 and became one of the three most important
17th century works on mechanics (the other two being Galileo’s \_[Discourses
and Mathematical Demonstrations Relating to Two New
Sciences](/wiki/Discourses\_and\_Mathematical\_Demonstrations\_Relating\_to\_Two\_New\_Sciences
"Discourses and Mathematical Demonstrations Relating to Two New Sciences")\_
(1638) and Newton’s \_[Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia
Mathematica](/wiki/Philosophi%C3%A6\_Naturalis\_Principia\_Mathematica
"Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica")\_ (1687)[36]). The \_Horologium
Oscillatorium\_ is the first modern treatise in which a physical problem (the
[accelerated motion](/wiki/Acceleration "Acceleration") of a falling body) is
[idealized by a set of parameters](/wiki/Mathematical\_model "Mathematical
model") then analyzed mathematically and constitutes one of the seminal works
of [applied mathematics](/wiki/Applied\_mathematics "Applied
mathematics").[37][38] It is for this reason, Huygens has been called the
first [theoretical physicist](/wiki/Theoretical\_physics "Theoretical physics")
and one of the founders of modern [mathematical
physics](/wiki/Mathematical\_physics "Mathematical physics").[39][40] Huygens'
\_Horologium Oscillatorium\_ had a tremendous influence on the history of
physics, especially on the work of Isaac Newton, who greatly admired the work.
For instance, the laws Huygens described in the \_Horologium Oscillatorium\_ are
structurally the same as Newton's first two [laws of
motion](/wiki/Newton%27s\_laws\_of\_motion "Newton's laws of motion").[41]

Five years after the publication of his \_Horologium Oscillatorium\_ , Huygens
described his [wave theory of light](/wiki/Wave\_theory\_of\_light "Wave theory
of light"). Though proposed in 1678, it wasn't published until 1690 in his
[Traité de la Lumière](/wiki/Trait%C3%A9\_de\_la\_Lumi%C3%A8re "Traité de la
Lumière"). His mathematical theory of light was initially rejected in favour
of Newton's corpuscular theory of light, until [Augustin-Jean
Fresnel](/wiki/Augustin-Jean\_Fresnel "Augustin-Jean Fresnel") adopted Huygens'
principle to give a complete explanation of the rectilinear propagation and
diffraction effects of light in 1821. Today this principle is known as the
[Huygens–Fresnel principle](/wiki/Huygens%E2%80%93Fresnel\_principle
"Huygens–Fresnel principle"). As an astronomer, Huygens began grinding lenses
with his brother Constantijn jr. to build telescopes for astronomical
research. He was the first to identify the rings of [Saturn](/wiki/Saturn
"Saturn") as "a thin, flat ring, nowhere touching, and inclined to the
ecliptic," and discovered the first of Saturn's moons,
[Titan](/wiki/Titan\_\(moon\) "Titan \(moon\)"), using a [refracting
telescope](/wiki/Refracting\_telescope "Refracting telescope").

Apart from the many important discoveries Huygens made in physics and
astronomy, and his inventions of ingenious devices, he was also the first who
brought mathematical rigor to the description of physical phenomena. Because
of this, and the fact that he developed institutional frameworks for
scientific research on the continent, he has been referred to as "the leading
actor in 'the making of science in Europe'"[42]
