## History[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Quantum\_mechanics&action=edit&section=19
"Edit section: History")]

Main articles: [History of quantum
mechanics](/wiki/History\_of\_quantum\_mechanics "History of quantum mechanics")
and [Atomic theory](/wiki/Atomic\_theory "Atomic theory")

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/a7/Max\_Planck\_%281858-1947%29.jpg/170px-
Max\_Planck\_%281858-1947%29.jpg)](/wiki/File:Max\_Planck\_\(1858-1947\).jpg)[Max
Planck](/wiki/Max\_Planck "Max Planck") is considered the father of the quantum
theory.

Quantum mechanics was developed in the early decades of the 20th century,
driven by the need to explain phenomena that, in some cases, had been observed
in earlier times. Scientific inquiry into the wave nature of light began in
the 17th and 18th centuries, when scientists such as [Robert
Hooke](/wiki/Robert\_Hooke "Robert Hooke"), [Christiaan
Huygens](/wiki/Christiaan\_Huygens "Christiaan Huygens") and [Leonhard
Euler](/wiki/Leonhard\_Euler "Leonhard Euler") proposed a wave theory of light
based on experimental observations.[74] In 1803 English
[polymath](/wiki/Polymath "Polymath") [Thomas
Young](/wiki/Thomas\_Young\_\(scientist\) "Thomas Young \(scientist\)")
described the famous [double-slit
experiment](/wiki/Young%27s\_interference\_experiment "Young's interference
experiment").[75] This experiment played a major role in the general
acceptance of the [wave theory of light](/wiki/Wave\_theory\_of\_light "Wave
theory of light").

During the early 19th century, [chemical](/wiki/Chemistry "Chemistry")
research by [John Dalton](/wiki/John\_Dalton "John Dalton") and [Amedeo
Avogadro](/wiki/Amedeo\_Avogadro "Amedeo Avogadro") lent weight to the [atomic
theory](/wiki/Atomic\_theory "Atomic theory") of matter, an idea that [James
Clerk Maxwell](/wiki/James\_Clerk\_Maxwell "James Clerk Maxwell"), [Ludwig
Boltzmann](/wiki/Ludwig\_Boltzmann "Ludwig Boltzmann") and others built upon to
establish the [kinetic theory of gases](/wiki/Kinetic\_theory\_of\_gases "Kinetic
theory of gases"). The successes of kinetic theory gave further credence to
the idea that matter is composed of atoms, yet the theory also had
shortcomings that would only be resolved by the development of quantum
mechanics.[76] While the early conception of atoms from [Greek
philosophy](/wiki/Ancient\_Greek\_philosophy "Ancient Greek philosophy") had
been that they were indivisible units - the word "atom" deriving from the
[Greek](/wiki/Greek\_language "Greek language") for "uncuttable" - the 19th
century saw the formulation of hypotheses about subatomic structure. One
important discovery in that regard was [Michael Faraday](/wiki/Michael\_Faraday
"Michael Faraday")'s 1838 observation of a glow caused by an electrical
discharge inside a glass tube containing gas at low pressure. [Julius
Plücker](/wiki/Julius\_Pl%C3%BCcker "Julius Plücker"), [Johann Wilhelm
Hittorf](/wiki/Johann\_Wilhelm\_Hittorf "Johann Wilhelm Hittorf") and [Eugen
Goldstein](/wiki/Eugen\_Goldstein "Eugen Goldstein") carried on and improved
upon Faraday's work, leading to the identification of [cathode
rays](/wiki/Cathode\_rays "Cathode rays"), which [J. J.
Thomson](/wiki/J.\_J.\_Thomson "J. J. Thomson") found to consist of subatomic
particles that would be called electrons.[77][78]

The [black-body radiation](/wiki/Black-body\_radiation "Black-body radiation")
problem was discovered by [Gustav Kirchhoff](/wiki/Gustav\_Kirchhoff "Gustav
Kirchhoff") in 1859. In 1900, Max Planck proposed the hypothesis that energy
is radiated and absorbed in discrete "quanta" (or energy packets), yielding a
calculation that precisely matched the observed patterns of black-body
radiation.[79] The word \_quantum\_ derives from the
[Latin](/wiki/Latin\_language "Latin language"), meaning "how great" or "how
much".[80] According to Planck, quantities of energy could be thought of as
divided into "elements" whose size (\_E\_) would be proportional to their
[frequency](/wiki/Frequency "Frequency") (\_ν\_):

 E = h ν {\displaystyle E=h\nu \ } ![{\\displaystyle E=h\\nu \\ }](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest\_v1/media/math/render/svg/24767663bb931daecf1eb628be4fea46f32e3622),

where \_h\_ is [Planck's constant](/wiki/Planck\_constant "Planck constant").
Planck cautiously insisted that this was only an aspect of the processes of
absorption and emission of radiation and was not the \_physical reality\_ of the
radiation.[81] In fact, he considered his quantum hypothesis a mathematical
trick to get the right answer rather than a sizable discovery.[82] However, in
1905 Albert Einstein interpreted Planck's quantum hypothesis
[realistically](/wiki/Local\_realism "Local realism") and used it to explain
the [photoelectric effect](/wiki/Photoelectric\_effect "Photoelectric effect"),
in which shining light on certain materials can eject electrons from the
material. Niels Bohr then developed Planck's ideas about radiation into a
[model of the hydrogen atom](/wiki/Bohr\_model "Bohr model") that successfully
predicted the [spectral lines](/wiki/Spectral\_line "Spectral line") of
hydrogen.[83] Einstein further developed this idea to show that an
[electromagnetic wave](/wiki/Electromagnetic\_wave "Electromagnetic wave") such
as light could also be described as a particle (later called the photon), with
a discrete amount of energy that depends on its frequency.[84] In his paper
"On the Quantum Theory of Radiation", Einstein expanded on the interaction
between energy and matter to explain the absorption and emission of energy by
atoms. Although overshadowed at the time by his general theory of relativity,
this paper articulated the mechanism underlying the stimulated emission of
radiation,[85] which became the basis of the laser.[86]

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/6e/Solvay\_conference\_1927.jpg/220px-
Solvay\_conference\_1927.jpg)](/wiki/File:Solvay\_conference\_1927.jpg)The 1927
[Solvay Conference](/wiki/Solvay\_Conference "Solvay Conference") in
[Brussels](/wiki/Brussels "Brussels") was the fifth world physics conference.

This phase is known as the [old quantum theory](/wiki/Old\_quantum\_theory "Old
quantum theory"). Never complete or self-consistent, the old quantum theory
was rather a set of [heuristic](/wiki/Heuristic "Heuristic") corrections to
classical mechanics.[87][88] The theory is now understood as a [semi-classical
approximation](/wiki/WKB\_approximation#Application\_to\_the\_Schr.C3.B6dinger\_equation
"WKB approximation") to modern quantum mechanics.[89][90] Notable results from
this period include, in addition to the work of Planck, Einstein and Bohr
mentioned above, Einstein and [Peter Debye](/wiki/Peter\_Debye "Peter Debye")'s
work on the [specific heat](/wiki/Specific\_heat "Specific heat") of solids,
Bohr and [Hendrika Johanna van Leeuwen](/wiki/Hendrika\_Johanna\_van\_Leeuwen
"Hendrika Johanna van Leeuwen")'s
[proof](/wiki/Bohr%E2%80%93Van\_Leeuwen\_theorem "Bohr–Van Leeuwen theorem")
that classical physics cannot account for [diamagnetism](/wiki/Diamagnetism
"Diamagnetism"), and [Arnold Sommerfeld](/wiki/Arnold\_Sommerfeld "Arnold
Sommerfeld")'s extension of the Bohr model to include special-relativistic
effects.[87][91]

In the mid-1920s quantum mechanics was developed to become the standard
formulation for atomic physics. In 1923, the French physicist [Louis de
Broglie](/wiki/Louis-Victor\_de\_Broglie "Louis-Victor de Broglie") put forward
his theory of matter waves by stating that particles can exhibit wave
characteristics and vice versa. Building on de Broglie's approach, modern
quantum mechanics was born in 1925, when the German physicists Werner
Heisenberg, Max Born, and [Pascual Jordan](/wiki/Pascual\_Jordan "Pascual
Jordan")[92][93] developed [matrix mechanics](/wiki/Matrix\_mechanics "Matrix
mechanics") and the Austrian physicist Erwin Schrödinger invented [wave
mechanics](/wiki/Schr%C3%B6dinger\_equation "Schrödinger equation"). Born
introduced the probabilistic interpretation of Schrödinger's wave function in
July 1926.[94] Thus, the entire field of quantum physics emerged, leading to
its wider acceptance at the Fifth [Solvay Conference](/wiki/Solvay\_Conference
"Solvay Conference") in 1927.[95]

By 1930 quantum mechanics had been further unified and formalized by [David
Hilbert](/wiki/David\_Hilbert "David Hilbert"), Paul Dirac and [John von
Neumann](/wiki/John\_von\_Neumann "John von Neumann")[96] with greater emphasis
on [measurement](/wiki/Measurement\_in\_quantum\_mechanics "Measurement in
quantum mechanics"), the statistical nature of our knowledge of reality, and
[philosophical speculation about the
'observer'](/wiki/Interpretations\_of\_quantum\_mechanics "Interpretations of
quantum mechanics"). It has since permeated many disciplines, including
quantum chemistry, [quantum electronics](/wiki/Quantum\_electronics "Quantum
electronics"), [quantum optics](/wiki/Quantum\_optics "Quantum optics"), and
[quantum information science](/wiki/Quantum\_information\_science "Quantum
information science"). It also provides a useful framework for many features
of the modern [periodic table of elements](/wiki/Periodic\_table "Periodic
table"), and describes the behaviors of [atoms](/wiki/Atoms "Atoms") during
[chemical bonding](/wiki/Chemical\_bond "Chemical bond") and the flow of
electrons in computer [semiconductors](/wiki/Semiconductor "Semiconductor"),
and therefore plays a crucial role in many modern technologies. While quantum
mechanics was constructed to describe the world of the very small, it is also
needed to explain some [macroscopic](/wiki/Macroscopic "Macroscopic")
phenomena such as [superconductors](/wiki/Superconductivity
"Superconductivity")[97] and [superfluids](/wiki/Superfluid "Superfluid").[98]
