## Early life and
family[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Galileo\_Galilei&action=edit&section=1 "Edit
section: Early life and family")]

Galileo was born in [Pisa](/wiki/Pisa "Pisa") (then part of the [Duchy of
Florence](/wiki/Duchy\_of\_Florence "Duchy of Florence")), Italy, on 15 February
1564,[15] the first of six children of [Vincenzo
Galilei](/wiki/Vincenzo\_Galilei "Vincenzo Galilei"), a
[lutenist](/wiki/Lutenist "Lutenist"), composer, and [music
theorist](/wiki/Music\_theory "Music theory"), and [Giulia
Ammannati](/wiki/Giulia\_Ammannati "Giulia Ammannati"), who had married in
1562. Galileo became an accomplished lutenist himself and would have learned
early from his father a scepticism for established authority.[16]

Three of Galileo's five siblings survived infancy. The youngest,
[Michelangelo](/wiki/Michelagnolo\_Galilei "Michelagnolo Galilei") (or
Michelagnolo), also became a lutenist and composer who added to Galileo's
financial burdens for the rest of his life.[17] Michelangelo was unable to
contribute his fair share of their father's promised dowries to their
brothers-in-law, who would later attempt to seek legal remedies for payments
due. Michelangelo would also occasionally have to borrow funds from Galileo to
support his musical endeavours and excursions. These financial burdens may
have contributed to Galileo's early desire to develop inventions that would
bring him additional income.[18]

When Galileo Galilei was eight, his family moved to
[Florence](/wiki/Florence,\_Italy "Florence, Italy"), but he was left under the
care of Muzio Tedaldi for two years. When Galileo was ten, he left Pisa to
join his family in Florence and there he was under the tutelage of Jacopo
Borghini.[15] He was educated, particularly in logic, from 1575 to 1578 in the
[Vallombrosa Abbey](/wiki/Vallombrosa\_Abbey "Vallombrosa Abbey"), about 30 km
southeast of Florence.[19][20]
