## Career[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Physics&action=edit&section=27 "Edit
section: Career")]

This section is an excerpt from [Physicist](/wiki/Physicist
"Physicist").[[edit](https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Physicist&action=edit)]

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/14/Albert\_Einstein\_1947.jpg/220px-
Albert\_Einstein\_1947.jpg)](/wiki/File:Albert\_Einstein\_1947.jpg)[Albert
Einstein](/wiki/Albert\_Einstein "Albert Einstein"), a key [theoretical
physicist](/wiki/Theoretical\_physics "Theoretical physics") in the 20th
century who developed the [theory of relativity](/wiki/Theory\_of\_relativity
"Theory of relativity") and parts of [early quantum
theory](/wiki/Old\_quantum\_theory "Old quantum theory")

A [physicist](/wiki/Physicist "Physicist") is a [scientist](/wiki/Scientist
"Scientist") who specializes in the field of physics, which encompasses the
interactions of matter and energy at all length and time scales in the
physical universe.[102][103] Physicists generally are interested in the root
or ultimate causes of [phenomena](/wiki/Phenomenon "Phenomenon"), and usually
frame their understanding in mathematical terms. They work across a wide range
of research fields, spanning all length scales: from [sub-atomic](/wiki/Atom
"Atom") and [particle physics](/wiki/Particle\_physics "Particle physics"),
through [biological physics](/wiki/Biological\_physics "Biological physics"),
to [cosmological](/wiki/Physical\_cosmology "Physical cosmology") length scales
encompassing the [universe](/wiki/Universe "Universe") as a whole. The field
generally includes two types of physicists: [experimental
physicists](/wiki/Experimental\_physics "Experimental physics") who specialize
in the observation of natural phenomena and the development and analysis of
experiments, and [theoretical physicists](/wiki/Theoretical\_physics
"Theoretical physics") who specialize in mathematical modeling of physical
systems to rationalize, explain and predict natural phenomena.[102]

Physicists can apply their knowledge towards solving practical problems or to
developing new technologies (also known as [applied
physics](/wiki/Applied\_physics "Applied physics") or [engineering
physics](/wiki/Engineering\_physics "Engineering physics")).[104][105][106]
