### René
Descartes[[edit](/w/index.php?title=History\_of\_physics&action=edit&section=9
"Edit section: René Descartes")]

Main article: [René Descartes](/wiki/Ren%C3%A9\_Descartes "René Descartes")

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/73/Frans\_Hals\_-
\_Portret\_van\_Ren%C3%A9\_Descartes.jpg/170px-Frans\_Hals\_-
\_Portret\_van\_Ren%C3%A9\_Descartes.jpg)](/wiki/File:Frans\_Hals\_-
\_Portret\_van\_Ren%C3%A9\_Descartes.jpg)[René
Descartes](/wiki/Ren%C3%A9\_Descartes "René Descartes") 
(1596–1650)

The French philosopher [René Descartes](/wiki/Ren%C3%A9\_Descartes "René
Descartes") (1596–1650) was well-connected to, and influential within, the
experimental philosophy networks of the day. Descartes had a more ambitious
agenda, however, which was geared toward replacing the Scholastic
philosophical tradition altogether. Questioning the reality interpreted
through the senses, Descartes sought to re-establish philosophical explanatory
schemes by reducing all perceived phenomena to being attributable to the
motion of an invisible sea of "corpuscles". (Notably, he reserved human
thought and [God](/wiki/God "God") from his scheme, holding these to be
separate from the physical universe). In proposing this philosophical
framework, Descartes supposed that different kinds of motion, such as that of
planets versus that of terrestrial objects, were not fundamentally different,
but were merely different manifestations of an endless chain of corpuscular
motions obeying universal principles. Particularly influential were his
explanations for circular astronomical motions in terms of the vortex motion
of corpuscles in space (Descartes argued, in accord with the beliefs, if not
the methods, of the Scholastics, that a [vacuum](/wiki/Vacuum "Vacuum") could
not exist), and his explanation of [gravity](/wiki/Gravity "Gravity") in terms
of corpuscles pushing objects downward.[33][34][35]

Descartes, like Galileo, was convinced of the importance of mathematical
explanation, and he and his followers were key figures in the development of
mathematics and geometry in the 17th century. Cartesian mathematical
descriptions of motion held that all mathematical formulations had to be
justifiable in terms of direct physical action, a position held by
[Huygens](/wiki/Christiaan\_Huygens "Christiaan Huygens") and the German
philosopher [Gottfried Leibniz](/wiki/Gottfried\_Leibniz "Gottfried Leibniz"),
who, while following in the Cartesian tradition, developed his own
philosophical alternative to Scholasticism, which he outlined in his 1714
work, the \_[Monadology](/wiki/Monadology "Monadology")\_. Descartes has been
dubbed the "Father of Modern Philosophy", and much subsequent [Western
philosophy](/wiki/Western\_philosophy "Western philosophy") is a response to
his writings, which are studied closely to this day. In particular, his
\_[Meditations on First Philosophy](/wiki/Meditations\_on\_First\_Philosophy
"Meditations on First Philosophy")\_ continues to be a standard text at most
university philosophy departments. Descartes' influence in mathematics is
equally apparent; the [Cartesian coordinate
system](/wiki/Cartesian\_coordinate\_system "Cartesian coordinate system") —
allowing algebraic equations to be expressed as geometric shapes in a two-
dimensional coordinate system — was named after him. He is credited as the
father of [analytical geometry](/wiki/Analytical\_geometry "Analytical
geometry"), the bridge between [algebra](/wiki/Algebra "Algebra") and
[geometry](/wiki/Geometry "Geometry"), important to the discovery of
[calculus](/wiki/Calculus "Calculus") and
[analysis](/wiki/Mathematical\_analysis "Mathematical analysis").
