## Criticism[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Virginity\_test&action=edit&section=7
"Edit section: Criticism")]

In May 2013, the [Supreme Court](/wiki/Supreme\_Court\_of\_India "Supreme Court
of India") of [India](/wiki/India "India") held that the [two-finger
test](/wiki/Two-finger\_test "Two-finger test") on a rape victim violates her
right to privacy, and asked the [Delhi](/wiki/Delhi "Delhi") government to
provide better medical procedures to confirm [sexual
assault](/wiki/Sexual\_assault "Sexual assault").[47][48] In 2003, the [Supreme
Court of India](/wiki/Supreme\_Court\_of\_India "Supreme Court of India") called
TFT "hypothetical" and "opinionative". In October 2022 the Supreme Court of
India strongly criticized the utilization of the "two-finger test" in rape and
sexual assault cases and urged the central government to take immediate steps
to cease the practice. The court emphasized that this test lacks any
scientific foundation to determine the sexual history of women and instead
causes further trauma to survivors. As a result, the Supreme Court ruled that
anyone conducting such a test on a survivor would be considered \_guilty of
misconduct\_.[49] Most countries have scrapped it as archaic, unscientific and
invasive of privacy and dignity.[50] [Quebec](/wiki/Quebec "Quebec")'s
\_Collège des Médecins\_ has banned members from conducting virginity tests
after some were found to be doing this, as well as providing virginity
certificates.[51] In 2021 the [Lahore High Court](/wiki/Lahore\_High\_Court
"Lahore High Court") banned the use of virginity tests in cases where women
claim they were raped.[52] The UK's [Royal College of
Midwives](/wiki/Royal\_College\_of\_Midwives "Royal College of Midwives") says
that virginity testing is indefensible with no medical benefit.[53] It was
criminalised in the UK from 2022, along with
[hymenorrhaphy](/wiki/Hymenorrhaphy "Hymenorrhaphy") and offering or aiding
and abetting these procedures, with the [Health and Care Act
2022](/wiki/Health\_and\_Care\_Act\_2022 "Health and Care Act 2022").[54]
