### Cosmology[[edit](/w/index.php?title=String\_theory&action=edit&section=20
"Edit section: Cosmology")]

Main article: [String cosmology](/wiki/String\_cosmology "String cosmology")

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/ed/WMAP\_2012.png/300px-
WMAP\_2012.png)](/wiki/File:WMAP\_2012.png)A map of the [cosmic microwave
background](/wiki/Cosmic\_microwave\_background "Cosmic microwave background")
produced by the [Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy
Probe](/wiki/Wilkinson\_Microwave\_Anisotropy\_Probe "Wilkinson Microwave
Anisotropy Probe")

The Big Bang theory is the prevailing [cosmological](/wiki/Physical\_cosmology
"Physical cosmology") model for the universe from the earliest known periods
through its subsequent large-scale evolution. Despite its success in
explaining many observed features of the universe including galactic
[redshifts](/wiki/Redshift "Redshift"), the relative abundance of light
elements such as [hydrogen](/wiki/Hydrogen "Hydrogen") and
[helium](/wiki/Helium "Helium"), and the existence of a [cosmic microwave
background](/wiki/Cosmic\_microwave\_background "Cosmic microwave background"),
there are several questions that remain unanswered. For example, the standard
Big Bang model does not explain why the universe appears to be the same in all
directions, why it appears flat on very large distance scales, or why certain
hypothesized particles such as [magnetic monopoles](/wiki/Magnetic\_monopoles
"Magnetic monopoles") are not observed in experiments.[84]

Currently, the leading candidate for a theory going beyond the Big Bang is the
theory of cosmic inflation. Developed by [Alan Guth](/wiki/Alan\_Guth "Alan
Guth") and others in the 1980s, inflation postulates a period of extremely
rapid accelerated expansion of the universe prior to the expansion described
by the standard Big Bang theory. The theory of cosmic inflation preserves the
successes of the Big Bang while providing a natural explanation for some of
the mysterious features of the universe.[85] The theory has also received
striking support from observations of the cosmic microwave background, the
radiation that has filled the sky since around 380,000 years after the Big
Bang.[86]

In the theory of inflation, the rapid initial expansion of the universe is
caused by a hypothetical particle called the [inflaton](/wiki/Inflaton
"Inflaton"). The exact properties of this particle are not fixed by the theory
but should ultimately be derived from a more fundamental theory such as string
theory.[87] Indeed, there have been a number of attempts to identify an
inflaton within the spectrum of particles described by string theory and to
study inflation using string theory. While these approaches might eventually
find support in observational data such as measurements of the cosmic
microwave background, the application of string theory to cosmology is still
in its early stages.[88]
