### Controversy over comets and \_The
Assayer\_[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Galileo\_Galilei&action=edit&section=15
"Edit section: Controversy over comets and The Assayer")]

See also: [The Assayer ยง Grassi on the
comets](/wiki/The\_Assayer#Grassi\_on\_the\_comets "The Assayer")

In 1619, Galileo became embroiled in a controversy with Father [Orazio
Grassi](/wiki/Orazio\_Grassi "Orazio Grassi"), professor of mathematics at the
Jesuit [Collegio Romano](/wiki/Collegio\_Romano "Collegio Romano"). It began as
a dispute over the nature of comets, but by the time Galileo had published
\_[The Assayer](/wiki/The\_Assayer "The Assayer")\_ (\_Il Saggiatore\_) in 1623,
his last salvo in the dispute, it had become a much wider controversy over the
very nature of science itself. The title page of the book describes Galileo as
a philosopher and "Matematico Primario" of the Grand Duke of Tuscany.[97]

Because \_The Assayer\_ contains such a wealth of Galileo's ideas on how science
should be practised, it has been referred to as his scientific
manifesto.[98][99] Early in 1619, Father Grassi had anonymously published a
pamphlet, \_An Astronomical Disputation on the Three Comets of the Year 1618\_
,[100] which discussed the nature of a comet that had appeared late in
November of the previous year. Grassi concluded that the comet was a fiery
body that had moved along a segment of a great circle at a constant distance
from the earth,[101][102] and since it moved in the sky more slowly than the
Moon, it must be farther away than the Moon.[\_[citation
needed](/wiki/Wikipedia:Citation\_needed "Wikipedia:Citation needed")\_]

Grassi's arguments and conclusions were criticised in a subsequent article,
\_[Discourse on Comets](/wiki/Discourse\_on\_Comets "Discourse on Comets")\_
,[103] published under the name of one of Galileo's disciples, a Florentine
lawyer named [Mario Guiducci](/wiki/Mario\_Guiducci "Mario Guiducci"), although
it had been largely written by Galileo himself.[104] Galileo and Guiducci
offered no definitive theory of their own on the nature of comets,[105][106]
although they did present some tentative conjectures that are now known to be
mistaken. (The correct approach to the study of comets had been proposed at
the time by Tycho Brahe.) In its opening passage, Galileo and Guiducci's
\_Discourse\_ gratuitously insulted the Jesuit [Christoph
Scheiner](/wiki/Christoph\_Scheiner "Christoph Scheiner"),[107][108][109] and
various uncomplimentary remarks about the professors of the [Collegio
Romano](/wiki/Roman\_College "Roman College") were scattered throughout the
work.[107] The Jesuits were offended,[107][106] and Grassi soon replied with a
[polemical](/wiki/Polemical "Polemical") tract of his own, \_The Astronomical
and Philosophical Balance\_ ,[110] under the pseudonym Lothario Sarsio
Sigensano,[111] purporting to be one of his own pupils.[\_[citation
needed](/wiki/Wikipedia:Citation\_needed "Wikipedia:Citation needed")\_]

\_The Assayer\_ was Galileo's devastating reply to the \_Astronomical
Balance\_.[103] It has been widely recognized as a masterpiece of polemical
literature,[112][113] in which "Sarsi's" arguments are subjected to withering
scorn.[114] It was greeted with wide acclaim, and particularly pleased the new
pope, [Urban VIII](/wiki/Pope\_Urban\_VIII "Pope Urban VIII"), to whom it had
been dedicated.[115] In Rome, in the previous decade, Barberini, the future
Urban VIII, had come down on the side of Galileo and the [Lincean
Academy](/wiki/Lincean\_Academy "Lincean Academy").[116]

Galileo's dispute with Grassi permanently alienated many Jesuits,[117] and
Galileo and his friends were convinced that they were responsible for bringing
about his later condemnation,[118] although supporting evidence for this is
not conclusive.[119][120]
