Attributing events to less-probable plots

For other uses, see [Conspiracy theory
(disambiguation)](/wiki/Conspiracy\_theory\_\(disambiguation\) "Conspiracy
theory \(disambiguation\)").

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/3d/Dollarnote\_siegel\_hq.jpg/220px-
Dollarnote\_siegel\_hq.jpg)](/wiki/File:Dollarnote\_siegel\_hq.jpg)The [Eye of
Providence](/wiki/Eye\_of\_Providence "Eye of Providence"), as seen on the US $1
bill, has been perceived by some to be evidence of a conspiracy linking the
[Founding Fathers of the United
States](/wiki/Founding\_Fathers\_of\_the\_United\_States "Founding Fathers of the
United States") to the [Illuminati](/wiki/Illuminati "Illuminati").[1]: 58
[2]: 47–49

A \*\*conspiracy theory\*\* is an explanation for an event or situation that
asserts the existence of a [conspiracy](/wiki/Conspiracy "Conspiracy") by
powerful and sinister groups, often political in motivation,[3][4][5] when
other explanations are more probable.[3][6][7] The term generally has a
[negative connotation](/wiki/Connotation "Connotation"), implying that the
appeal of a conspiracy theory is based in prejudice, emotional conviction, or
insufficient evidence.[8] A conspiracy theory is distinct from a
[conspiracy](/wiki/Conspiracy "Conspiracy"); it refers to a hypothesized
conspiracy with specific characteristics, including but not limited to
opposition to the mainstream consensus among those who are qualified to
evaluate its accuracy, such as [scientists](/wiki/Scientist "Scientist") or
[historians](/wiki/Historians "Historians").[9][10][11]

Conspiracy theories tend to be internally consistent and correlate with each
other;[12] they are generally designed to resist
[falsification](/wiki/Falsifiability "Falsifiability") either by evidence
against them or a lack of evidence for them.[13] They are reinforced by
[circular reasoning](/wiki/Circular\_reasoning "Circular reasoning"): both
evidence against the conspiracy \_and\_ absence of evidence for it are
misinterpreted as evidence of its truth.[8][14] [Stephan
Lewandowsky](/wiki/Stephan\_Lewandowsky "Stephan Lewandowsky") observes "This
interpretation relies on the notion that, the stronger the evidence against a
conspiracy, the more the conspirators must want people to believe their
version of events."[15] As a consequence, the conspiracy becomes a matter of
faith rather than something that can be proven or disproven.[1][16] Studies
have linked belief in conspiracy theories to distrust of authority and
political [cynicism](/wiki/Cynicism\_\(contemporary\) "Cynicism
\(contemporary\)").[17][18][19] Some researchers suggest that \*\*conspiracist
ideation\*\* —belief in conspiracy theories—may be psychologically harmful or
pathological.[20][21] Such belief is correlated with lower [analytical
thinking](/wiki/Analytical\_thinking "Analytical thinking"), lower
[intelligence](/wiki/Intelligence "Intelligence"), [psychological
projection](/wiki/Psychological\_projection "Psychological projection"),
[paranoia](/wiki/Paranoia "Paranoia"), and
[Machiavellianism](/wiki/Machiavellianism\_\(psychology\) "Machiavellianism
\(psychology\)").[22] Psychologists usually attribute belief in conspiracy
theories to a number of psychopathological conditions such as
[paranoia](/wiki/Paranoia "Paranoia"), [schizotypy](/wiki/Schizotypy
"Schizotypy"), [narcissism](/wiki/Narcissism "Narcissism"), and [insecure
attachment](/wiki/Insecure\_attachment "Insecure attachment"),[9] or to a form
of [cognitive bias](/wiki/Cognitive\_bias "Cognitive bias") called "[illusory
pattern perception](/wiki/Illusory\_pattern\_perception "Illusory pattern
perception")".[23][24] It has also been linked with the so-called [Dark
triad](/wiki/Dark\_triad "Dark triad") personality types, whose common feature
is lack of [empathy](/wiki/Empathy "Empathy").[25] However, a 2020 review
article found that most [cognitive scientists](/wiki/Cognitive\_science
"Cognitive science") view conspiracy theorizing as typically nonpathological,
given that unfounded belief in conspiracy is common across both historical and
contemporary cultures, and may arise from innate human tendencies towards
gossip, group cohesion, and religion.[9] One historical review of conspiracy
theories concluded that "Evidence suggests that the aversive feelings that
people experience when in crisis—fear, uncertainty, and the feeling of being
out of control—stimulate a motivation to make sense of the situation,
increasing the likelihood of perceiving conspiracies in social
situations."[26]

Historically, conspiracy theories have been closely linked to
[prejudice](/wiki/Prejudice "Prejudice"), [propaganda](/wiki/Propaganda
"Propaganda"), [witch hunts](/wiki/Witch\_hunt "Witch hunt"), [wars](/wiki/War
"War"), and [genocides](/wiki/Genocide "Genocide").[12][27][28][29][30] They
are often strongly believed by the perpetrators of [terrorist
attacks](/wiki/Terrorism "Terrorism"), and were used as justification by
[Timothy McVeigh](/wiki/Timothy\_McVeigh "Timothy McVeigh") and [Anders
Breivik](/wiki/Anders\_Breivik "Anders Breivik"), as well as by governments
such as [Nazi Germany](/wiki/Nazi\_Germany "Nazi Germany"), the [Soviet
Union](/wiki/Soviet\_Union "Soviet Union"),[27] and
[Turkey](/wiki/Conspiracy\_theories\_in\_Turkey "Conspiracy theories in
Turkey").[31] [AIDS denialism](/wiki/AIDS\_denialism "AIDS denialism") by the
government of [South Africa](/wiki/South\_Africa "South Africa"), motivated by
conspiracy theories, caused an estimated 330,000 deaths from AIDS.[32][33][34]
[QAnon](/wiki/QAnon "QAnon") and
[denialism](/wiki/Election\_denial\_movement\_in\_the\_United\_States "Election
denial movement in the United States") about the [2020 United States
presidential election](/wiki/2020\_United\_States\_presidential\_election "2020
United States presidential election") results led to the [January 6 United
States Capitol attack](/wiki/January\_6\_United\_States\_Capitol\_attack "January 6
United States Capitol attack"),[35][36][37] and belief in [conspiracy theories
about genetically modified foods](/wiki/GMO\_conspiracy\_theories "GMO
conspiracy theories") led the government of [Zambia](/wiki/Zambia "Zambia") to
reject food aid during a [famine](/wiki/Famine "Famine"),[28] at a time when
three million people in the country were suffering from [hunger](/wiki/Hunger
"Hunger").[38] Conspiracy theories are a significant obstacle to improvements
in [public health](/wiki/Public\_health "Public health"),[28][39] encouraging
opposition to such public health measures as [vaccination](/wiki/Vaccination
"Vaccination") and [water fluoridation](/wiki/Water\_fluoridation "Water
fluoridation"). They have been linked to outbreaks of [vaccine-preventable
diseases](/wiki/Vaccine-preventable\_disease "Vaccine-preventable
disease").[28][32][39][40] Other effects of conspiracy theories include
reduced trust in [scientific evidence](/wiki/Scientific\_evidence "Scientific
evidence"),[12][28][41] radicalization and ideological reinforcement of
[extremist](/wiki/Extremism "Extremism") groups,[27][42] and negative
consequences for the [economy](/wiki/Economy "Economy").[27]

Conspiracy theories once limited to fringe audiences have become commonplace
in [mass media](/wiki/Mass\_media "Mass media"), the [internet](/wiki/Internet
"Internet"), and [social media](/wiki/Social\_media "Social media"),[9][12]
emerging as a [cultural phenomenon](/wiki/Cultural\_phenomenon "Cultural
phenomenon") of the late 20th and early 21st centuries.[43][44][45][46] They
are widespread around the world and are often commonly believed, some even
held by the majority of the population.[47][48][49] Interventions to reduce
the occurrence of conspiracy beliefs include maintaining an [open
society](/wiki/Open\_society "Open society"), encouraging people to use
[analytical thinking](/wiki/Analytical\_thinking "Analytical thinking"), and
reducing feelings of uncertainty, anxiety, or powerlessness.[41][47][48][50]
