## 20th century: birth of modern
physics[[edit](/w/index.php?title=History\_of\_physics&action=edit&section=23
"Edit section: 20th century: birth of modern physics")]

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d9/Mariecurie.jpg/200px-
Mariecurie.jpg)](/wiki/File:Mariecurie.jpg)[Marie Skłodowska-
Curie](/wiki/Marie\_Curie "Marie Curie") 
(1867–1934) She was awarded two Nobel prizes, Physics (1903) and Chemistry
(1911)

At the end of the 19th century, physics had evolved to the point at which
classical mechanics could cope with highly complex problems involving
macroscopic situations; thermodynamics and kinetic theory were well
established; geometrical and physical optics could be understood in terms of
electromagnetic waves; and the conservation laws for energy and momentum (and
mass) were widely accepted. So profound were these and other developments that
it was generally accepted that all the important laws of physics had been
discovered and that, henceforth, research would be concerned with clearing up
minor problems and particularly with improvements of method and measurement.

However, around 1900 serious doubts arose about the completeness of the
classical theories—the triumph of Maxwell's theories, for example, was
undermined by inadequacies that had already begun to appear—and their
inability to explain certain physical phenomena, such as the energy
distribution in [blackbody radiation](/wiki/Blackbody\_radiation "Blackbody
radiation") and the [photoelectric effect](/wiki/Photoelectric\_effect
"Photoelectric effect"), while some of the theoretical formulations led to
paradoxes when pushed to the limit. Prominent physicists such as [Hendrik
Lorentz](/wiki/Hendrik\_Lorentz "Hendrik Lorentz"), [Emil Cohn](/wiki/Emil\_Cohn
"Emil Cohn"), [Ernst Wiechert](/wiki/Ernst\_Wiechert "Ernst Wiechert") and
[Wilhelm Wien](/wiki/Wilhelm\_Wien "Wilhelm Wien") believed that some
modification of [Maxwell's equations](/wiki/Maxwell%27s\_equations "Maxwell's
equations") might provide the basis for all physical laws. These shortcomings
of classical physics were never to be resolved and new ideas were required. At
the beginning of the 20th century a major revolution shook the world of
physics, which led to a new era, generally referred to as modern physics.[65]
