### Public health
campaigns[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Conspiracy\_theory&action=edit&section=19
"Edit section: Public health campaigns")]

Successful methods for dispelling conspiracy theories have been studied in the
context of [public health](/wiki/Public\_health "Public health") campaigns. A
key characteristic of communication strategies to address medical conspiracy
theories is the use of techniques that rely less on emotional appeals. It is
more effective to use methods that encourage people to process information
rationally. The use of visual aids is also an essential part of these
strategies. Since conspiracy theories are based on intuitive thinking, and
visual information processing relies on intuition, visual aids are able to
compete directly for the public's attention.[9]

In public health campaigns, information retention by the public is highest for
loss-framed messages that include more extreme outcomes. However, excessively
appealing to catastrophic scenarios (e.g. low vaccination rates causing an
epidemic) may provoke anxiety, which is associated with conspiracism and could
increase belief in conspiracy theories instead. [Scare
tactics](/wiki/Scare\_tactics "Scare tactics") have sometimes had mixed
results, but are generally considered ineffective. An example of this is the
use of images that showcase disturbing health outcomes, such as the impact of
smoking on dental health. One possible explanation is that information
processed via the fear response is typically not evaluated rationally, which
may prevent the message from being linked to the desired behaviors.[9]

A particularly important technique is the use of [focus
groups](/wiki/Focus\_group "Focus group") to understand exactly what people
believe, and the reasons they give for those beliefs. This allows messaging to
focus on the specific concerns that people identify, and on topics that are
easily misinterpreted by the public, since these are factors which conspiracy
theories can take advantage of. In addition, discussions with focus groups and
observations of the group dynamics can indicate which anti-conspiracist ideas
are most likely to spread.[9]

Interventions that address medical conspiracy theories by reducing
powerlessness include emphasizing the principle of [informed
consent](/wiki/Informed\_consent "Informed consent"), giving patients all the
relevant information without imposing decisions on them, to ensure that they
have a sense of control. Improving access to healthcare also reduces medical
conspiracism. However, doing so by political efforts can also fuel additional
conspiracy theories, which occurred with the [Affordable Care
Act](/wiki/Affordable\_Care\_Act "Affordable Care Act") (Obamacare) in the
United States. Another successful strategy is to require people to watch a
short video when they fulfil requirements such as registration for school or a
drivers' license, which has been demonstrated to improve vaccination rates and
signups for organ donation.[9]

Another approach is based on viewing conspiracy theories as narratives which
express personal and cultural values, making them less susceptible to
straightforward factual corrections, and more effectively addressed by
counter-narratives.[97][102] Counter-narratives can be more engaging and
memorable than simple corrections, and can be adapted to the specific values
held by individuals and cultures. These narratives may depict personal
experiences, or alternatively they can be cultural narratives. In the context
of vaccination, examples of cultural narratives include stories about
scientific breakthroughs, about the world before vaccinations, or about heroic
and altruistic researchers. The themes to be addressed would be those that
could be exploited by conspiracy theories to increase [vaccine
hesitancy](/wiki/Vaccine\_hesitancy "Vaccine hesitancy"), such as perceptions
of vaccine risk, lack of patient empowerment, and lack of trust in medical
authorities.[97]
