### Unification of superstring
theories[[edit](/w/index.php?title=String\_theory&action=edit&section=8 "Edit
section: Unification of superstring theories")]

[![A star-shaped diagram with the various limits of M-theory labeled at its
six
vertices.](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b8/Limits\_of\_M-
theory.svg/350px-Limits\_of\_M-theory.svg.png)](/wiki/File:Limits\_of\_M-
theory.svg)A schematic illustration of the relationship between
[M-theory](/wiki/M-theory "M-theory"), the five [superstring
theories](/wiki/Superstring\_theory "Superstring theory"), and eleven-
dimensional [supergravity](/wiki/Supergravity "Supergravity"). The shaded
region represents a family of different physical scenarios that are possible
in M-theory. In certain limiting cases corresponding to the cusps, it is
natural to describe the physics using one of the six theories labeled there.

In the 1970s, many physicists became interested in
[supergravity](/wiki/Supergravity "Supergravity") theories, which combine
general relativity with supersymmetry. Whereas general relativity makes sense
in any number of dimensions, supergravity places an upper limit on the number
of dimensions.[32] In 1978, work by [Werner Nahm](/wiki/Werner\_Nahm "Werner
Nahm") showed that the maximum spacetime dimension in which one can formulate
a consistent supersymmetric theory is eleven.[33] In the same year, [Eugene
Cremmer](/wiki/Eugene\_Cremmer "Eugene Cremmer"), [Bernard
Julia](/wiki/Bernard\_Julia "Bernard Julia"), and [Joël
Scherk](/wiki/Jo%C3%ABl\_Scherk "Joël Scherk") of the [École Normale
Supérieure](/wiki/%C3%89cole\_Normale\_Sup%C3%A9rieure "École Normale
Supérieure") showed that supergravity not only permits up to eleven dimensions
but is in fact most elegant in this maximal number of dimensions.[34][35]

Initially, many physicists hoped that by compactifying [eleven-dimensional
supergravity](/wiki/Eleven-dimensional\_supergravity "Eleven-dimensional
supergravity"), it might be possible to construct realistic models of our
four-dimensional world. The hope was that such models would provide a unified
description of the four fundamental forces of nature: electromagnetism, the
[strong](/wiki/Strong\_nuclear\_force "Strong nuclear force") and [weak nuclear
forces](/wiki/Weak\_nuclear\_force "Weak nuclear force"), and gravity. Interest
in eleven-dimensional supergravity soon waned as various flaws in this scheme
were discovered. One of the problems was that the laws of physics appear to
distinguish between clockwise and counterclockwise, a phenomenon known as
[chirality](/wiki/Chirality\_\(physics\) "Chirality \(physics\)"). Edward
Witten and others observed this chirality property cannot be readily derived
by compactifying from eleven dimensions.[35]

In the [first superstring revolution](/wiki/First\_superstring\_revolution
"First superstring revolution") in 1984, many physicists turned to string
theory as a unified theory of particle physics and quantum gravity. Unlike
supergravity theory, string theory was able to accommodate the chirality of
the standard model, and it provided a theory of gravity consistent with
quantum effects.[35] Another feature of string theory that many physicists
were drawn to in the 1980s and 1990s was its high degree of uniqueness. In
ordinary particle theories, one can consider any collection of elementary
particles whose classical behavior is described by an arbitrary
[Lagrangian](/wiki/Lagrangian\_\(field\_theory\) "Lagrangian \(field theory\)").
In string theory, the possibilities are much more constrained: by the 1990s,
physicists had argued that there were only five consistent supersymmetric
versions of the theory.[35]

Although there were only a handful of consistent superstring theories, it
remained a mystery why there was not just one consistent formulation.[35]
However, as physicists began to examine string theory more closely, they
realized that these theories are related in intricate and nontrivial ways.
They found that a system of strongly interacting strings can, in some cases,
be viewed as a system of weakly interacting strings. This phenomenon is known
as S-duality. It was studied by Ashoke Sen in the context of heterotic strings
in four dimensions[36][37] and by Chris Hull and Paul Townsend in the context
of the type IIB theory.[38] Theorists also found that different string
theories may be related by T-duality. This duality implies that strings
propagating on completely different spacetime geometries may be physically
equivalent.[39]

At around the same time, as many physicists were studying the properties of
strings, a small group of physicists were examining the possible applications
of higher dimensional objects. In 1987, Eric Bergshoeff, Ergin Sezgin, and
Paul Townsend showed that eleven-dimensional supergravity includes two-
dimensional branes.[40] Intuitively, these objects look like sheets or
membranes propagating through the eleven-dimensional spacetime. Shortly after
this discovery, [Michael Duff](/wiki/Michael\_Duff\_\(physicist\) "Michael Duff
\(physicist\)"), Paul Howe, Takeo Inami, and Kellogg Stelle considered a
particular compactification of eleven-dimensional supergravity with one of the
dimensions curled up into a circle.[41] In this setting, one can imagine the
membrane wrapping around the circular dimension. If the radius of the circle
is sufficiently small, then this membrane looks just like a string in ten-
dimensional spacetime. Duff and his collaborators showed that this
construction reproduces exactly the strings appearing in type IIA superstring
theory.[42]

Speaking at a string theory conference in 1995, Edward Witten made the
surprising suggestion that all five superstring theories were in fact just
different limiting cases of a single theory in eleven spacetime dimensions.
Witten's announcement drew together all of the previous results on S- and
T-duality and the appearance of higher-dimensional branes in string
theory.[43] In the months following Witten's announcement, hundreds of new
papers appeared on the Internet confirming different parts of his
proposal.[44] Today this flurry of work is known as the second superstring
revolution.[45]

Initially, some physicists suggested that the new theory was a fundamental
theory of membranes, but Witten was skeptical of the role of membranes in the
theory. In a paper from 1996, Hořava and Witten wrote "As it has been proposed
that the eleven-dimensional theory is a supermembrane theory but there are
some reasons to doubt that interpretation, we will non-committally call it the
M-theory, leaving to the future the relation of M to membranes."[46] In the
absence of an understanding of the true meaning and structure of M-theory,
Witten has suggested that the \_M\_ should stand for "magic", "mystery", or
"membrane" according to taste, and the true meaning of the title should be
decided when a more fundamental formulation of the theory is known.[47]
