### Diet[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Cassowary&action=edit&section=5 "Edit
section: Diet")]

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/6b/Double-
wattled\_Cassowary\_or\_Kasuari\_%28Casuarius\_casuarius%29.jpg/220px-Double-
wattled\_Cassowary\_or\_Kasuari\_%28Casuarius\_casuarius%29.jpg)](/wiki/File:Double-
wattled\_Cassowary\_or\_Kasuari\_\(Casuarius\_casuarius\).jpg)Southern cassowary
eating a banana

Cassowaries as aforementioned, are predominantly
[frugivorous](/wiki/Frugivorous "Frugivorous"), but
[omnivorous](/wiki/Omnivore "Omnivore") opportunistically when small prey is
available. Besides fruits, their diet includes flowers, fungi, snails,
insects, frogs, lizards, snakes, birds, fish, rats, mice, small marsupials and
[carrion](/wiki/Carrion "Carrion"),[39] although their hunting of small prey
is more akin to foraging if they could catch them. Despite their similar
omnivorous foraging behaviour, cassowaries and introduced [wild
boars](/wiki/Wild\_boars "Wild boars") had co-existed for thousands of years in
[New Guinea](/wiki/New\_Guinea "New Guinea"), even though it should have
dictated that both species should be in direct competition such as in the case
in the cassowary population in [Queensland](/wiki/Queensland "Queensland"),
[Australia](/wiki/Australia "Australia").

Fruit from at least 26 plant families has been documented in the diet of
cassowaries. Fruits from the [laurel](/wiki/Laurus\_nobilis "Laurus nobilis"),
[podocarp](/wiki/Podocarp "Podocarp"), palm, wild grape,
[nightshade](/wiki/Nightshade "Nightshade"), and myrtle families are important
items in the diet.[27] The poisonous [cassowary plum](/wiki/Cassowary\_plum
"Cassowary plum") takes its name from the bird. The bird avoids the poisons of
these fruits due to the presence of their incredibly short gastrointestinal
tract, the shortest of all ratites in relation to their size[40]. The
cassowary's incredibly short and simple digestive tract leads to a short gut
retention time which allow seeds to remain unharmed during the comparatively
soft digestion process and allows them to consume fruits that contain toxins
such as [cyanogens](/wiki/Cyanogen "Cyanogen")[40]. This short gut length also
allows the birds to eat a wider variety of protein source, which is
unsurprising given their omnivorous diet.

Where trees are dropping fruit, cassowaries come in and feed, with each bird
defending a tree from others for a few days. They move on when the fruit is
depleted. Fruit, even items as large as [bananas](/wiki/Banana "Banana") and
apples, is swallowed whole. Cassowaries are a [keystone
species](/wiki/Keystone\_species "Keystone species") of rain forests because
they eat fallen fruit whole and distribute seeds across the jungle floor via
excrement.[27]

Adult and young cassowaries also practice [corprophagy](/wiki/Corprophagy
"Corprophagy"). As adult waste often contain half-digested fruit which still
has nutritional value, so the birds would devour each other's as well as their
own droppings.[41][42]

In more urbanised areas, especially in [Queensland](/wiki/Queensland
"Queensland"), [Australia](/wiki/Australia "Australia"), 'urbanised'
cassowaries have adopted to also feed on picnic blankets, tables and baskets
or backyard bird feeders and compost heaps, thereby consuming a wide range of
non-natural and non-native foods as well.[43] In fact, cassowaries are known
to eat non-edible items, in one case, collection of urban cassowary droppings
resulted in many unusual items. Outside of the skeletal remains of a
[honeyeater](/wiki/Honeyeater "Honeyeater"), which was likely preyed by the
cassowary, researchers also found remains of a childâ€™s coloured building
blocks, various sized marbles and a very small plastic car that came from a
cereal packet.[44] In terms of roadkill, discarded fish was reported, but the
most common type of roadkill eaten by cassowaries are
[bandicoots](/wiki/Bandicoot "Bandicoot"), which potentially represent the
largest prey item consumed by the birds.[44][45][46]

In captivity, Cassowaries get the majority of their protein source from dog or
monkey food.[42] In fact, captive cassowaries consume almost a liter of a
protein source (such as dog food) in conjunction with 19 liters of fruit a
day, which results in 5% of their overall diet.[42]
