Supposition or system of ideas intended to explain something

For theories in science, see [Scientific theory](/wiki/Scientific\_theory
"Scientific theory"). For other uses, see [Theory
(disambiguation)](/wiki/Theory\_\(disambiguation\) "Theory
\(disambiguation\)").

A \*\*theory\*\* is a [rational](/wiki/Reason "Reason") type of [abstract
thinking](/wiki/Abstraction "Abstraction") about a
[phenomenon](/wiki/Phenomenon "Phenomenon"), or the results of such thinking.
The process of contemplative and rational thinking is often associated with
such processes as [observational study](/wiki/Observational\_study
"Observational study") or research. Theories may be
[scientific](/wiki/Scientific\_theory "Scientific theory"), belong to a non-
scientific discipline, or no discipline at all. Depending on the context, a
theory's assertions might, for example, include generalized explanations of
how [nature](/wiki/Nature\_\(philosophy\) "Nature \(philosophy\)") works. The
word has its roots in [ancient Greek](/wiki/Ancient\_Greek "Ancient Greek"),
but in modern use it has taken on several related meanings.

In modern science, the term "theory" refers to [scientific
theories](/wiki/Scientific\_theory "Scientific theory"), a well-confirmed type
of explanation of [nature](/wiki/Nature "Nature"), made in a way
[consistent](/wiki/Consistency "Consistency") with the [scientific
method](/wiki/Scientific\_method "Scientific method"), and fulfilling the
[criteria](/wiki/Scientific\_theory#Characteristics\_of\_theories "Scientific
theory") required by [modern science](/wiki/Modern\_science "Modern science").
Such theories are described in such a way that scientific tests should be able
to provide [empirical](/wiki/Empirical\_evidence "Empirical evidence") support
for it, or [empirical](/wiki/Empirical\_evidence "Empirical evidence")
contradiction ("[falsify](/wiki/Falsifiability "Falsifiability")") of it.
Scientific theories are the most reliable, rigorous, and comprehensive form of
scientific knowledge,[1] in contrast to more common uses of the word "theory"
that imply that something is unproven or speculative (which in formal terms is
better characterized by the word \_[hypothesis](/wiki/Hypothesis
"Hypothesis")\_).[2] Scientific theories are distinguished from hypotheses,
which are individual empirically [testable](/wiki/Testable "Testable")
[conjectures](/wiki/Conjecture "Conjecture"), and from [scientific
laws](/wiki/Scientific\_laws "Scientific laws"), which are descriptive accounts
of the way nature behaves under certain conditions.

Theories guide the enterprise of finding facts rather than of reaching goals,
and are neutral concerning alternatives among values.[3]: 131 A theory can be
a [body of knowledge](/wiki/Body\_of\_knowledge "Body of knowledge"), which may
or may not be associated with particular explanatory
[models](/wiki/Conceptual\_model "Conceptual model"). To theorize is to develop
this body of knowledge.[4]: 46

The word theory or "in theory" is sometimes used outside of science to refer
to something which the speaker did not experience or test before.[5] In
science, this same concept is referred to as a [hypothesis](/wiki/Hypothesis
"Hypothesis"), and the word "hypothetically" is used both inside and outside
of science. In its usage outside of science, the word "theory" is very often
contrasted to "[practice](/wiki/Praxis\_\(process\) "Praxis \(process\)")"
(from Greek \_[praxis](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/praxis
"wiktionary:praxis")\_ , πρᾶξις) a Greek term for \_doing\_ , which is opposed to
theory.[6] A "classical example" of the distinction between "theoretical" and
"practical" uses the discipline of medicine: [medical
theory](/wiki/Medical\_theory "Medical theory") involves trying to understand
the [causes](/wiki/Causality "Causality") and nature of health and sickness,
while the practical side of medicine is trying to make people healthy. These
two things are related but can be independent, because it is possible to
research health and sickness without curing specific patients, and it is
possible to cure a patient without knowing how the cure worked.[a]
