## Plot[[edit](/w/index.php?title=In\_Theory&action=edit&section=2 "Edit
section: Plot")]

Data, an android, and Jenna D'Sora are in the torpedo room configuring several
probes with which the \_Enterprise\_ will explore a nearby nebula. D'Sora
explains that she just split up with her boyfriend and Data attempts to
comfort her. Later they play together in a [chamber
concert](/wiki/Chamber\_music "Chamber music") along with [Keiko
O'Brien](/wiki/Keiko\_O%27Brien "Keiko O'Brien") ([Rosalind
Chao](/wiki/Rosalind\_Chao "Rosalind Chao")). D'Sora complains of her abilities
as a musician, but Data insists that he could not hear anything wrong.

Later on the bridge, Data is reviewing the information from the probes sent
into the nebula. He theorises that life might have evolved differently in the
nebula because of the volume of dark matter detected. Captain Jean-Luc Picard
([Patrick Stewart](/wiki/Patrick\_Stewart "Patrick Stewart")) orders the ship
to the nearest planet within the nebula. While Data and D'Sora configure
further probes, she kisses him on the cheek and then on the lips before
leaving the room. Data seeks the opinion of his friends, including Picard,
[Guinan](/wiki/Guinan\_\(Star\_Trek\) "Guinan \(Star Trek\)") ([Whoopi
Goldberg](/wiki/Whoopi\_Goldberg "Whoopi Goldberg")), [Geordi La
Forge](/wiki/Geordi\_La\_Forge "Geordi La Forge") ([LeVar
Burton](/wiki/LeVar\_Burton "LeVar Burton")), Commander [William
Riker](/wiki/William\_Riker "William Riker") ([Jonathan
Frakes](/wiki/Jonathan\_Frakes "Jonathan Frakes")), [Deanna
Troi](/wiki/Deanna\_Troi "Deanna Troi") ([Marina Sirtis](/wiki/Marina\_Sirtis
"Marina Sirtis")) and [Worf](/wiki/Worf\_\(Star\_Trek\) "Worf \(Star Trek\)")
([Michael Dorn](/wiki/Michael\_Dorn "Michael Dorn")). Data decides to pursue
the relationship and goes to D'Sora's cabin with a bunch of flowers, where he
informs her that he created a romantic subroutine for the relationship.

Meanwhile, the \_Enterprise\_ is approaching the planet. Picard enters his ready
room and finds his belongings scattered on the floor. He calls in Worf, who
cannot explain their displacement. D'Sora arrives at Data's cabin where he is
painting. She tells him to continue, but is then annoyed when he does so,
causing him some confusion. The ship arrives at the coordinates for the planet
but finds nothing there. Then it suddenly appears as the ship's computer warns
of a depressurization in the observation lounge. The crew investigate and find
all the furniture piled in one corner of the room.

Data is visiting D'Sora, but she seems unhappy and he is acting erratically in
order to find an appropriate response to make her happy. It becomes evident to
the crew that the nebula is causing distortions in space; Picard orders the
ship into warp to leave the nebula as quickly as possible but this speeds up
the distortions. Whilst investigating them, Lieutenant Van Mayter (Georgina
Shore) is killed when a distortion embeds her into the deck. Data discovers
that [dark matter](/wiki/Dark\_matter "Dark matter") is causing the
distortions. The ship can detect the pockets at short range, but not in enough
time to move out of the way. Worf proposes using a shuttle to lead the
\_Enterprise\_ out, and Picard insists on piloting it alone.

Picard pilots the shuttle through the field of distortion pockets. Chief
[Miles O'Brien](/wiki/Miles\_O%27Brien\_\(Star\_Trek\) "Miles O'Brien \(Star
Trek\)") ([Colm Meaney](/wiki/Colm\_Meaney "Colm Meaney"))
[transports](/wiki/Transporter\_\(Star\_Trek\) "Transporter \(Star Trek\)") the
Captain back to the ship before the shuttle is destroyed. The approach
resulted in the \_Enterprise\_ nearing the edge of the nebula, and they quickly
depart. Afterwards, D'Sora reveals to Data over a romantic dinner in his
quarters that she broke up with her boyfriend because he was emotionally
unavailable and then pursued him because he was the same. Data realises that
she is breaking up with him and explains that he will delete the subroutine.
D'Sora departs and Data is seemingly unperturbed, although his cat, Spot,
jumps into his lap as if to comfort him.
