##
Applications[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Quantum\_mechanics&action=edit&section=13
"Edit section: Applications")]

Main article: [Applications of quantum
mechanics](/wiki/Applications\_of\_quantum\_mechanics "Applications of quantum
mechanics")

Quantum mechanics has had enormous success in explaining many of the features
of our universe, with regard to small-scale and discrete quantities and
interactions which cannot be explained by [classical
methods](/wiki/Classical\_physics "Classical physics").[note 2] Quantum
mechanics is often the only theory that can reveal the individual behaviors of
the subatomic particles that make up all forms of matter (electrons,
[protons](/wiki/Proton "Proton"), [neutrons](/wiki/Neutron "Neutron"),
[photons](/wiki/Photon "Photon"), and others). [Solid-state
physics](/wiki/Solid-state\_physics "Solid-state physics") and [materials
science](/wiki/Materials\_science "Materials science") are dependent upon
quantum mechanics.[38]

In many aspects, modern technology operates at a scale where quantum effects
are significant. Important applications of quantum theory include [quantum
chemistry](/wiki/Quantum\_chemistry "Quantum chemistry"), [quantum
optics](/wiki/Quantum\_optics "Quantum optics"), [quantum
computing](/wiki/Quantum\_computing "Quantum computing"), [superconducting
magnets](/wiki/Superconducting\_magnet "Superconducting magnet"), [light-
emitting diodes](/wiki/Light-emitting\_diode "Light-emitting diode"), the
[optical amplifier](/wiki/Optical\_amplifier "Optical amplifier") and the
laser, the [transistor](/wiki/Transistor "Transistor") and
[semiconductors](/wiki/Semiconductor "Semiconductor") such as the
[microprocessor](/wiki/Microprocessor "Microprocessor"), [medical and research
imaging](/wiki/Medical\_imaging "Medical imaging") such as [magnetic resonance
imaging](/wiki/Magnetic\_resonance\_imaging "Magnetic resonance imaging") and
[electron microscopy](/wiki/Electron\_microscope "Electron microscope").[39]
Explanations for many biological and physical phenomena are rooted in the
nature of the chemical bond, most notably the macro-molecule [DNA](/wiki/DNA
"DNA").
