## Theory
Y[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Theory\_X\_and\_Theory\_Y&action=edit&section=3 "Edit
section: Theory Y")]

Theory Y is based on positive assumptions regarding the typical worker. Theory
Y managers assume employees are [internally
motivated](/wiki/Intrinsic\_motivation "Intrinsic motivation"), enjoy their
job, and work to better themselves without a direct reward in return. These
managers view their employees as one of the most valuable assets to the
company, driving the internal workings of the corporation. Employees
additionally tend to take full [responsibility](/wiki/Duty "Duty") for their
work and do not need close [supervision](/wiki/Supervision "Supervision") to
create a quality product.[2] It is important to note, however, that before an
employee carries out their task, they must first obtain the manager's
approval. This ensures work stays efficient, productive, and in-line with
company standards.[9]

Theory Y managers gravitate towards relating to the worker on a more personal
level, as opposed to a more conductive and teaching-based relationship.[8] As
a result, Theory Y followers may have a better relationship with their boss,
creating a healthier atmosphere in the workplace.[10] In comparison to Theory
X, Theory Y incorporates a pseudo-democratic environment to the workforce.[4]
This allows the employee to design, construct, and publish their work in a
timely manner in co-ordinance to their workload and projects.

Although Theory Y encompasses creativity and discussion, it does have
limitations. While there is a more personal and individualistic feel, this
leaves room for error in terms of consistency and uniformity.[4] The workplace
lacks unvarying rules and practices, which could potentially be detrimental to
the quality standards of the product and strict guidelines of a given company.
