Examination intended to determine female virginity

A \*\*virginity test\*\* is the pseudoscientific practice and process of
determining whether a woman or girl is a [virgin](/wiki/Virgin "Virgin");
i.e., to determine that she has never engaged in, or been subjected to,
[vaginal intercourse](/wiki/Sexual\_intercourse "Sexual intercourse"). The test
typically involves a check for the presence of an intact [hymen](/wiki/Hymen
"Hymen"), typically on the flawed assumption that it can only be, and will
always be torn as a result of vaginal intercourse.[1] It has been practiced
since ancient times but its recent use in the United Kingdom dates back to the
1970s.[2] It is legal for doctors in the United States to perform virginity
tests.[3]

Virginity testing is widely considered controversial because of its
implications for the tested women and girls as it is viewed as
[unethical](/wiki/Ethics "Ethics"),[4] and because a number of such tests are
widely considered to be unscientific. In cases of suspected [rape](/wiki/Rape
"Rape") or [child sexual abuse](/wiki/Child\_sexual\_abuse "Child sexual
abuse"), a detailed examination of the hymen may be performed, but the
condition of the hymen alone is often inconclusive.[5] In October 2018, the
[UN Human Rights Council](/wiki/UN\_Human\_Rights\_Council "UN Human Rights
Council"), [UN Women](/wiki/UN\_Women "UN Women") and the [World Health
Organization](/wiki/World\_Health\_Organization "World Health Organization")
(WHO) called for the ban of virginity testing as it is a painful, humiliating
and a traumatic practice that constitutes [violence against
women](/wiki/Violence\_against\_women "Violence against women").[6]
