### Background[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Quantum\_Reality&action=edit&section=2
"Edit section: Background")]

Following a brief summary of the experimental crises (such as the [ultraviolet
catastrophe](/wiki/Ultraviolet\_catastrophe "Ultraviolet catastrophe")) which
motivated quantum theory, Herbert identifies four major formulations of
quantum theory: [Werner Heisenberg](/wiki/Werner\_Heisenberg "Werner
Heisenberg")'s [matrix mechanics](/wiki/Matrix\_mechanics "Matrix mechanics"),
[Erwin Schrödinger](/wiki/Erwin\_Schr%C3%B6dinger "Erwin Schrödinger")'s [wave
mechanics](/wiki/Schr%C3%B6dinger\_equation "Schrödinger equation"), [Paul
Dirac](/wiki/Paul\_Dirac "Paul Dirac")'s [transformation
theory](/wiki/Transformation\_theory\_\(quantum\_mechanics\) "Transformation
theory \(quantum mechanics\)"), and [Richard Feynman](/wiki/Richard\_Feynman
"Richard Feynman")'s [sum-over-histories](/wiki/Path\_integral\_formulation
"Path integral formulation") formulation.[2]: 41–53

In introducing quantum objects (which he dubs "quons"), Herbert describes how
quantum properties inhere in a [wave function](/wiki/Wave\_function "Wave
function"), which serves as a [proxy](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/proxy
"wikt:proxy") for the [measurement](/wiki/Measurement\_in\_quantum\_mechanics
"Measurement in quantum mechanics") of these properties. He likens the quantum
measurement process to mathematically [treating](/wiki/Signal\_processing
"Signal processing") the wave function as a
[summation](/wiki/Series\_\(mathematics\) "Series \(mathematics\)") of
[waveforms](/wiki/Waveform "Waveform") of a particular family, with various
families corresponding to particular properties. The
[bandwidth](/wiki/Bandwidth\_\(signal\_processing\) "Bandwidth \(signal
processing\)") of the spectrum of these waveforms represents the uncertainty
in the quantum measurement. Herbert shows that for pairs of [conjugate
variables](/wiki/Conjugate\_variables "Conjugate variables"), such as position
and momentum, these bandwidths are [linked](/wiki/Complementarity\_\(physics\)
"Complementarity \(physics\)") such that their product has a finite lower
bound, thereby illustrating the basis of [Heisenberg's uncertainty
principle](/wiki/Heisenberg%27s\_uncertainty\_principle "Heisenberg's
uncertainty principle"): any \_single\_ property can be measured to arbitrary
precision, but conjugate properties cannot \_simultaneously\_ be known to
arbitrary precision.[2]: 71–112

Herbert identifies two philosophical problems presented by quantum theory—the
\_interpretation question\_ , concerning the physical nature of the reality
underlying observation; and the \_[measurement
problem](/wiki/Measurement\_problem "Measurement problem")\_ , concerning the
apparently special role of the measurement act in quantum theory, and various
approaches to formally defining the measurement act.[2]: 113–156
