### Perfect information and imperfect
information[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Game\_theory&action=edit&section=11 "Edit
section: Perfect information and imperfect information")]

Main article: [Perfect information](/wiki/Perfect\_information "Perfect
information")

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/23/PD\_with\_outside\_option.svg/280px-
PD\_with\_outside\_option.svg.png)](/wiki/File:PD\_with\_outside\_option.svg)A game
of imperfect information. The dotted line represents ignorance on the part of
player 2, formally called an [information
set](/wiki/Information\_set\_\(game\_theory\) "Information set \(game theory\)").

An important subset of sequential games consists of games of perfect
information. A game with perfect information means that all players, at every
move in the game, know the previous history of the game and the moves
previously made by all other players. An imperfect information game is played
when the players do not know all moves already made by the opponent such as a
simultaneous move game.[23] Examples of perfect-information games include
[tic-tac-toe](/wiki/Tic-tac-toe "Tic-tac-toe"), [checkers](/wiki/Draughts
"Draughts"), [chess](/wiki/Chess "Chess"), and [Go](/wiki/Go\_\(board\_game\)
"Go \(board game\)").[24][25][26]

Many card games are games of imperfect information, such as
[poker](/wiki/Poker "Poker") and [bridge](/wiki/Contract\_bridge "Contract
bridge").[27] Perfect information is often confused with [complete
information](/wiki/Complete\_information "Complete information"), which is a
similar concept pertaining to the common knowledge of each player's sequence,
strategies, and payoffs throughout gameplay.[28] Complete information requires
that every player know the strategies and payoffs available to the other
players but not necessarily the actions taken, whereas perfect information is
knowledge of all aspects of the game and players.[29] Games of [incomplete
information](/wiki/Information\_asymmetry "Information asymmetry") can be
reduced, however, to games of imperfect information by introducing "[moves by
nature](/wiki/Move\_by\_nature "Move by nature")".[30]
