### Use of game theory in
Economics[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Game\_theory&action=edit&section=28 "Edit
section: Use of game theory in Economics")]

Game theory is a major method used in mathematical economics and business for
[modeling](/wiki/Economic\_model "Economic model") competing behaviors of
interacting [agents](/wiki/Agent\_\(economics\) "Agent
\(economics\)").[c][76][77][78] Applications include a wide array of economic
phenomena and approaches, such as [auctions](/wiki/Auction "Auction"),
[bargaining](/wiki/Bargaining "Bargaining"), [mergers and
acquisitions](/wiki/Mergers\_and\_acquisitions "Mergers and acquisitions")
pricing,[79] [fair division](/wiki/Fair\_division "Fair division"),
[duopolies](/wiki/Duopoly "Duopoly"), [oligopolies](/wiki/Oligopoly
"Oligopoly"), [social network](/wiki/Social\_network "Social network")
formation, [agent-based computational economics](/wiki/Agent-
based\_computational\_economics "Agent-based computational economics"),[80][81]
[general equilibrium](/wiki/General\_equilibrium "General equilibrium"),
mechanism design,[82][83][84][85][86] and [voting systems](/wiki/Voting\_system
"Voting system");[87] and across such broad areas as experimental
economics,[88][89][90][91][92] [behavioral
economics](/wiki/Behavioral\_game\_theory "Behavioral game
theory"),[93][94][95][96][97][98] [information
economics](/wiki/Information\_economics "Information
economics"),[45][46][47][48] [industrial
organization](/wiki/Industrial\_organization "Industrial
organization"),[99][100][101][102] and [political
economy](/wiki/Political\_economy "Political economy").[103][104][105][106]

This research usually focuses on particular sets of strategies known as
["solution concepts" or "equilibria"](/wiki/Solution\_concept "Solution
concept"). A common assumption is that players act rationally. In non-
cooperative games, the most famous of these is the Nash equilibrium. A set of
strategies is a Nash equilibrium if each represents a best response to the
other strategies. If all the players are playing the strategies in a Nash
equilibrium, they have no unilateral incentive to deviate, since their
strategy is the best they can do given what others are doing.[107][108]

The payoffs of the game are generally taken to represent the
[utility](/wiki/Utility "Utility") of individual players.

A prototypical paper on game theory in economics begins by presenting a game
that is an abstraction of a particular economic situation. One or more
solution concepts are chosen, and the author demonstrates which strategy sets
in the presented game are equilibria of the appropriate type. Economists and
business professors suggest two primary uses (noted above): \_descriptive\_ and
\_[prescriptive](/wiki/Decision\_theory#Normative\_and\_descriptive\_decision\_theory
"Decision theory")\_.[70]
