## Overview and fundamental
concepts[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Quantum\_mechanics&action=edit&section=1
"Edit section: Overview and fundamental concepts")]

Quantum mechanics allows the calculation of properties and behaviour of
physical systems. It is typically applied to microscopic systems: molecules,
atoms and sub-atomic particles. It has been demonstrated to hold for complex
molecules with thousands of atoms,[4] but its application to human beings
raises philosophical problems, such as [Wigner's
friend](/wiki/Wigner%27s\_friend "Wigner's friend"), and its application to the
universe as a whole remains speculative.[5] Predictions of quantum mechanics
have been verified experimentally to an extremely high degree of
[accuracy](/wiki/Accuracy "Accuracy"). For example, the refinement of quantum
mechanics for the interaction of light and matter, known as [quantum
electrodynamics](/wiki/Quantum\_electrodynamics "Quantum electrodynamics")
(QED), has been [shown to agree with experiment](/wiki/Precision\_tests\_of\_QED
"Precision tests of QED") to within 1 part in 1012 when predicting the
magnetic properties of an electron.[6]

A fundamental feature of the theory is that it usually cannot predict with
certainty what will happen, but only give probabilities. Mathematically, a
probability is found by taking the square of the absolute value of a [complex
number](/wiki/Complex\_number "Complex number"), known as a probability
amplitude. This is known as the [Born rule](/wiki/Born\_rule "Born rule"),
named after physicist [Max Born](/wiki/Max\_Born "Max Born"). For example, a
quantum particle like an [electron](/wiki/Electron "Electron") can be
described by a wave function, which associates to each point in space a
probability amplitude. Applying the Born rule to these amplitudes gives a
[probability density function](/wiki/Probability\_density\_function "Probability
density function") for the position that the electron will be found to have
when an experiment is performed to measure it. This is the best the theory can
do; it cannot say for certain where the electron will be found. The
[Schrödinger equation](/wiki/Schr%C3%B6dinger\_equation "Schrödinger equation")
relates the collection of probability amplitudes that pertain to one moment of
time to the collection of probability amplitudes that pertain to another.[7]:
67–87

One consequence of the mathematical rules of quantum mechanics is a tradeoff
in predictability between different measurable quantities. The most famous
form of this [uncertainty principle](/wiki/Uncertainty\_principle "Uncertainty
principle") says that no matter how a quantum particle is prepared or how
carefully experiments upon it are arranged, it is impossible to have a precise
prediction for a measurement of its position and also at the same time for a
measurement of its [momentum](/wiki/Momentum "Momentum").[7]: 427–435

Another consequence of the mathematical rules of quantum mechanics is the
phenomenon of [quantum interference](/wiki/Quantum\_interference "Quantum
interference"), which is often illustrated with the [double-slit
experiment](/wiki/Double-slit\_experiment "Double-slit experiment"). In the
basic version of this experiment, a [coherent light
source](/wiki/Coherence\_\(physics\) "Coherence \(physics\)"), such as a
[laser](/wiki/Laser "Laser") beam, illuminates a plate pierced by two parallel
slits, and the light passing through the slits is observed on a screen behind
the plate.[8]: 102–111 [2]: 1.1–1.8 The wave nature of light causes the light
waves passing through the two slits to
[interfere](/wiki/Interference\_\(wave\_propagation\) "Interference \(wave
propagation\)"), producing bright and dark bands on the screen – a result that
would not be expected if light consisted of classical particles.[8] However,
the light is always found to be absorbed at the screen at discrete points, as
individual particles rather than waves; the interference pattern appears via
the varying density of these particle hits on the screen. Furthermore,
versions of the experiment that include detectors at the slits find that each
detected [photon](/wiki/Photon "Photon") passes through one slit (as would a
classical particle), and not through both slits (as would a wave).[8]: 109
[9][10] However, [such experiments](/wiki/Double-slit\_experiment#Which\_way
"Double-slit experiment") demonstrate that particles do not form the
interference pattern if one detects which slit they pass through. This
behavior is known as [wave–particle
duality](/wiki/Wave%E2%80%93particle\_duality "Wave–particle duality"). In
addition to light, [electrons](/wiki/Electrons "Electrons"),
[atoms](/wiki/Atoms "Atoms"), and [molecules](/wiki/Molecules "Molecules") are
all found to exhibit the same dual behavior when fired towards a double
slit.[2]

Another non-classical phenomenon predicted by quantum mechanics is [quantum
tunnelling](/wiki/Quantum\_tunnelling "Quantum tunnelling"): a particle that
goes up against a [potential barrier](/wiki/Potential\_barrier "Potential
barrier") can cross it, even if its kinetic energy is smaller than the maximum
of the potential.[11] In classical mechanics this particle would be trapped.
Quantum tunnelling has several important consequences, enabling [radioactive
decay](/wiki/Radioactive\_decay "Radioactive decay"), [nuclear
fusion](/wiki/Nuclear\_fusion "Nuclear fusion") in stars, and applications such
as [scanning tunnelling microscopy](/wiki/Scanning\_tunnelling\_microscopy
"Scanning tunnelling microscopy"),[tunnel diode](/wiki/Tunnel\_diode "Tunnel
diode") and [tunnel field-effect transistor](/wiki/Tunnel\_field-
effect\_transistor "Tunnel field-effect transistor").[12][13]

When quantum systems interact, the result can be the creation of [quantum
entanglement](/wiki/Quantum\_entanglement "Quantum entanglement"): their
properties become so intertwined that a description of the whole solely in
terms of the individual parts is no longer possible. Erwin Schrödinger called
entanglement "...\_the\_ characteristic trait of quantum mechanics, the one that
enforces its entire departure from classical lines of thought".[14] Quantum
entanglement enables [quantum computing](/wiki/Quantum\_computing "Quantum
computing") and is part of quantum communication protocols, such as [quantum
key distribution](/wiki/Quantum\_key\_distribution "Quantum key distribution")
and [superdense coding](/wiki/Superdense\_coding "Superdense coding").[15]
Contrary to popular misconception, entanglement does not allow sending signals
[faster than light](/wiki/Faster-than-light "Faster-than-light"), as
demonstrated by the [no-communication theorem](/wiki/No-communication\_theorem
"No-communication theorem").[15]

Another possibility opened by entanglement is testing for "[hidden
variables](/wiki/Hidden\_variable\_theory "Hidden variable theory")",
hypothetical properties more fundamental than the quantities addressed in
quantum theory itself, knowledge of which would allow more exact predictions
than quantum theory can provide. A collection of results, most significantly
[Bell's theorem](/wiki/Bell%27s\_theorem "Bell's theorem"), have demonstrated
that broad classes of such hidden-variable theories are in fact incompatible
with quantum physics. According to Bell's theorem, if nature actually operates
in accord with any theory of \_local\_ hidden variables, then the results of a
[Bell test](/wiki/Bell\_test\_experiments "Bell test experiments") will be
constrained in a particular, quantifiable way. Many Bell tests have been
performed and they have shown results incompatible with the constraints
imposed by local hidden variables.[16][17]

It is not possible to present these concepts in more than a superficial way
without introducing the actual mathematics involved; understanding quantum
mechanics requires not only manipulating complex numbers, but also [linear
algebra](/wiki/Linear\_algebra "Linear algebra"), [differential
equations](/wiki/Differential\_equation "Differential equation"), [group
theory](/wiki/Group\_theory "Group theory"), and other more advanced
subjects.[18][19] Accordingly, this article will present a mathematical
formulation of quantum mechanics and survey its application to some useful and
oft-studied examples.
