## Two-finger
test[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Virginity\_test&action=edit&section=2 "Edit
section: Two-finger test")]

The process of virginity testing varies by region. In areas where medical
doctors are available, the tests would often be given in a doctor's
office.[10] However, in countries where doctors are not available, testers
will often be older women, or whoever can be trusted to search for a
hymen.[11] This is common among [African tribes](/wiki/African\_tribes "African
tribes") that perform the test.[12]

Another form of virginity testing involves testing for laxity of vaginal
muscles with fingers (the "two-finger test"). A doctor performs the test by
inserting a finger into the female's vagina to check the level of vaginal
laxity, which is used to determine if she is "habituated to sexual
intercourse".[13] However, the usefulness of these criteria has been
questioned by medical authorities and opponents of virginity testing because
vaginal laxity and the absence of a hymen can both be caused by other factors,
and the "two-finger test" is based on subjective observation.[14][15]

Examinations to test for previous sexual activity used to be performed on
[rape](/wiki/Rape "Rape") victims in [Bangladesh](/wiki/Bangladesh
"Bangladesh"), [Pakistan](/wiki/Pakistan "Pakistan") and [India](/wiki/India
"India") before it was banned.[16][17][18]

Among the [Bantu](/wiki/Bantu\_peoples "Bantu peoples") peoples of Sub-Saharan
Africa, virginity testing or even the [suturing](/wiki/Surgical\_suture
"Surgical suture") of the [labia majora](/wiki/Labia\_majora "Labia majora")
(called [infibulation](/wiki/Infibulation "Infibulation")) has been
commonplace. Traditionally, Kenuzi girls (of the [Sudan](/wiki/Sudan "Sudan"))
are married before puberty[19] by adult men who inspect them manually for
virginity.
