### Theory of
tides[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Galileo\_Galilei&action=edit&section=14 "Edit
section: Theory of tides")]

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fd/Galileo\_Galilei%2C\_1564-1642\_RMG\_BHC2699.tiff/lossy-
page1-180px-
Galileo\_Galilei%2C\_1564-1642\_RMG\_BHC2699.tiff.jpg)](/wiki/File:Galileo\_Galilei,\_1564-1642\_RMG\_BHC2699.tiff)Galileo
Galilei, portrait by [Francesco Porcia](/wiki/Francesco\_Porcia "Francesco
Porcia")

[Cardinal Bellarmine](/wiki/Cardinal\_Bellarmine "Cardinal Bellarmine") had
written in 1615 that the [Copernican system](/wiki/Copernican\_heliocentrism
"Copernican heliocentrism") could not be defended without "a true physical
demonstration that the sun does not circle the earth but the earth circles the
sun".[86] Galileo considered his theory of the [tides](/wiki/Tide "Tide") to
provide such evidence.[87] This theory was so important to him that he
originally intended to call his \_Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World
Systems\_ the \_Dialogue on the Ebb and Flow of the Sea\_.[88] The reference to
tides was removed from the title by order of the Inquisition.[\_[citation
needed](/wiki/Wikipedia:Citation\_needed "Wikipedia:Citation needed")\_]

For Galileo, the tides were caused by the sloshing back and forth of water in
the seas as a point on the Earth's surface sped up and slowed down because of
the Earth's rotation on its axis and revolution around the Sun. He circulated
his first account of the tides in 1616, addressed to [Cardinal
Orsini](/wiki/Alessandro\_Orsini\_\(cardinal\) "Alessandro Orsini
\(cardinal\)").[89] His theory gave the first insight into the importance of
the shapes of ocean basins in the size and timing of tides; he correctly
accounted, for instance, for the negligible tides halfway along the [Adriatic
Sea](/wiki/Adriatic\_Sea "Adriatic Sea") compared to those at the ends. As a
general account of the cause of tides, however, his theory was a
failure.[\_[citation needed](/wiki/Wikipedia:Citation\_needed
"Wikipedia:Citation needed")\_]

If this theory were correct, there would be only one high tide per day.
Galileo and his contemporaries were aware of this inadequacy because there are
two daily high tides at [Venice](/wiki/Venice "Venice") instead of one, about
12 hours apart. Galileo dismissed this anomaly as the result of several
secondary causes including the shape of the sea, its depth, and other
factors.[90][91] [Albert Einstein](/wiki/Albert\_Einstein "Albert Einstein")
later expressed the opinion that Galileo developed his "fascinating arguments"
and accepted them uncritically out of a desire for physical proof of the
motion of the Earth.[92] Galileo also dismissed the idea, [known from
antiquity](/wiki/Tide#History "Tide") and by his contemporary Johannes Kepler,
that the [Moon](/wiki/Moon "Moon")[93] caused the tidesâ€”Galileo also took no
interest in Kepler's [elliptical orbits of the
planets](/wiki/Kepler%27s\_laws\_of\_planetary\_motion "Kepler's laws of planetary
motion").[94][95] Galileo continued to argue in favour of his theory of tides,
considering it the ultimate proof of Earth's motion.[96]
